---
Title:  Go To Market Strategies and Services for Apple Developers
Year:   2005
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2005/001/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Good afternoon. My name is Christy Wyatt. I'm the director of Worldwide Developer Relations. And we're here to talk about go-to-market strategies and services for developers. Now, if you're an engineer here looking for any technical content whatsoever, this is the advanced warning that you should leave, because there is zero technical content in this session whatsoever.

This is a little bit of an experiment, actually. We get asked a lot of times why we talk-- why we don't talk to developers at developer conference about how they take the solutions they've worked so hard to build to market. And maybe somebody is new to the Apple community. Maybe they are new to selling software, period, and they've never actually had to take a product to market before.

So we get a lot of questions in developer relations. And we thought that we would do a little trial this year and put in a session on the grid to see if this was the sort of content that developers at this event might want to hear. Thank you.

I believe in ending on a high note, so thank you all for coming. These are some of the questions we get asked all the time. My team specifically is responsible for seeking out new partners and taking partners to market and working with partners on an ongoing basis. So these are the questions that we get asked every single day. These are the questions that come into our developer program every single day.

So we're going to go through the top ten questions we get about sales and marketing all the time. If you've been selling products for a while, some of them may feel a little rudimentary, but maybe there's a few things that are Apple unique that you may learn this afternoon.

The first question is what are the key components of a go-to-market plan? If you've never actually had to sell a piece of software before or try to sell a product before, all the different things you need to do to launch a product might be just a little bit overwhelming. So the things that we're going to focus most specifically on this afternoon are around marketing and sales.

What are some easy ways or some not-so-easy ways to market your product, and what are the different options for taking that product to market? Retail, online, channels, direct, and so forth. So starting off with marketing, let's talk about marketing. We get asked a lot how to best do PR. Should I be doing PR because I'm a small organization?

Does it really make sense for me? Is it going to cost me a lot of money? PR, in fact, could be probably one of the cheapest forms of marketing and one of the most effective if you do it right. Press releases don't cost a lot to write or don't cost a lot to get out there and get posted, but you have to think very clearly about what it is that you're doing. The first thing you have to understand is who's your customer and who are you trying to get to and who do they listen to? So what are the publications?

What are the pages you're targeting? Who are the influential journalists? How do you identify the influencers? And then creating a message that is very clear about your product and attractive to that market. Now that sounds really, really simple, but oftentimes it's not. We see a lot of press releases coming through that aren't quite that crisp and clear. So you have to think really clearly about your value proposition. And then repeat, repeat, repeat. The trick is saying the same thing over and over and over and over again until everybody knows what your product and your brand stands for.

So clear messaging. Identify the influencers. One other thing you might want to think about, especially if you're just starting out, is maybe getting some professional help. And I don't mean medical professional help. Although if you've tried to do this for a little while, you might require it. But we mean there's a lot of really good freelancers out there that make themselves available to smaller organizations. They're incredibly easy to find. There's a URL here for an association that freelancers make themselves available through. One thing we would recommend is find somebody who really understands the customers you're trying to get to.

This could be a freelance person who's really good at talking to enterprise publications. And you're a consumer-focused product. That's probably not going to work out really, really well. So try to find someone who understands the market you're going after. And then try to get that clear message and repeat, repeat, repeat.

We've listed a couple of the Apple publications. Some things you might want to think about are do you want to talk to the Apple press, the people who write about Apple all the time? Or do you want to talk to people who are publications and journalists who are in the vertical market that you're trying to attract? So, for example, talking to the Apple publications or talking to someone specifically in the life sciences, like bio-IT world, if you're writing an application that's scientific in nature.

It's really easy, generally, to find the journalist that you want to target. If you go to any one of these publications and do a search on Apple, you're going to see who writes about Apple all the time. And now you know who it is you need to get your stuff in front of.

A question we get all the time is how do you get Apple to endorse one of your press releases? And I'm just going to be really, really honest, it's incredibly, incredibly hard. We're really, really tough about press releases and putting our name on third party things. Very few get Apple quotes.

This event, for example, we had, I think, 18 at the very most and this is a huge, huge event. Some of the things we look for is to make sure that the press releases that we're reviewing are very product related. They're about your products, your customers. We never announce other people's things. We may support you in doing that.

That you're going to distribute them on a major news wire. So if it's not going through a major news service, we won't even really consider it. And that it's identifiable to some target market that we're looking at. And I know that's not on this list. We're going to talk to a little bit more on how to get things in front of us. But these are some things to think about. And again, you know, we're always excited to see partners doing press releases about Apple related software. We don't think that they all necessarily need to be quoted by Apple.

But these are some of the things that we're looking for. Another thing to think about is what are some major events? If there's a lot of Apple media going on around a major Apple event, that may or may not be a good time for you to be talking about your Apple related product. So what are the major Apple events?

I'll give you a hint. This is one. There's actually three that we consider to be major Apple events. Apple Expo's in Paris this year in September. Macworld Expo in San Francisco. Always in San Francisco. Big, big event for us even though it's not an Apple specific and Apple only event. And then WWDC.

Each one of these events is very unique in how they work with third parties. But oftentimes they'll make demo opportunities available or booth opportunities. There may be PR opportunities. So you should go to the specific websites and look for what are the third party opportunities around those different events. Another thing you may want to think about is what other events is Apple participating in? So for example, if you're writing education software, NECC is in two weeks.

It's really pretty simple to figure out whether Apple's going to be at an event in a big way. You look at the exhibitors list and if we're there, chances are someone from Apple's going to be around. If you already have a booth planned and you're going to be showing Apple product in your booth, we'd actually love to know. We oftentimes sort of plot out what kind of Apple solutions are going to be showing on the floor of any major event. And if you're showing your product, we'd love to know about it. So we'll let you know how to do that in a little bit.

[Transcript missing]

Other online marketing opportunities. So not all the ways to market with Apple are through Apple. So, for example, VersionTracker is another very well-trafficked site for third-party products. We get a lot of folks that are looking at the VersionTracker page and then coming back and talking to us.

So I've put the URL for that up here. Other Apple.com sites. So we get asked a lot how you get on different Apple pages. So, for example, sometimes we reference third-party software on the server page or on the ITPro page or on some of the other creative markets pages.

The answer is get your products into MPG and the Downloads Guide. When we're looking for new solutions, maybe things we've missed, maybe new solutions in emerging markets, that's where we go look. You know, the MPG, as we said, is the most comprehensive software guide. And so when the teams that are responsible for vertical markets are looking for new content, that's kind of where they go. So I would suggest you start there.

Other online marketing opportunities, sometimes banner ads. Banner ads obviously are not necessarily free, so they're not as cost effective as some of the other things that we were talking about. But they can be equally effective. Some other things to think about are, as I was saying before, try to identify the target site.

Is it a Mac community you're looking for or is it a vertical community you're looking for? So, does it make sense to post some sort of banner ad on one of these very Mac-specific URLs that we're listing here or do you want to try to identify sites that are well trafficked for the target customer you're going after?

The other thing to think about is whether you're really just trying to build awareness or whether you're actually trying to capture people. And so are you just trying to put your graphic or your logo and get your message up there, or when they click through, is there something specific you want to do with them?

So then that kind of leads us to sales. If somebody clicks through and they want to buy something from you, what is that call to action? So I would have to say that by far the biggest percentage of questions that we get are around sales of products and what is the most effective way to sell products out to the Mac customers. Obviously there's many different paths to market depending on what your solution is and who your customer is.

There's direct, retail, online, through resellers or influencers or VARs. Direct we're not going to talk all that much about this afternoon. If you're doing direct sales, chances are you know who your customers are. It's probably one of the most expensive ways to go and sell your product because you have full-time people going and doing it. We're going to spend most of our time this afternoon talking about retail, online, and resellers.

So is retail right for me? Apple, as a company, might know something about retail. If you were in the keynote, we definitely know how to make very cool demos about our retail team, because you saw that in the keynote. But actually, we've gotten a lot of attention for retail.

And so to talk a little bit not just about Apple retail, but some things you might want to think about in approaching retail in general, I want to introduce Carl Smit. Carl is the Retail Merchandising Manager for the Apple Store for software products, and he's going to to talk a little bit about retail strategies.

Good afternoon. So I'm the Product Merchandising Manager for software in the Apple retail store. So all the software products. We have a few merchants. We have a different one for hardware. And then we have some for overseas, but we all work pretty closely together as a team. What I'm going to start with is just weighing the cost versus the benefits of entering retail

[Transcript missing]

Publishers.

So there are a lot of different publishers, and a lot of them have different levels of involvement as to whether or not they pick up your product. Some of them want to be involved in actual development of the product and finishing the product along. Others want to be involved in packaging.

Some are taking a very active role in the marketing. But some of them don't do any of that. They really are acting more like a distributor, and it's just an easier method of entry if you're having difficulty working with one of the distributors and you want to get into a retail channel more quickly.

So it can vary. And there are publishers that work through distributors, and there are publishers who are direct. So there's no definite. A good example of a publisher is Aspire, who does all the EA games, and they pick up smaller titles. I don't know if any of you are familiar with iSale, which is a new product that helps you sell products on eBay, but they're working through Aspire.

And Aspire is currently with Navarre, and so that's how Apple Retail procures, say, iSale. It goes through the publisher, through the distributor, and then to the retailer. And the third general category are vendor reps. And the best way to think of them are like sales reps that represent more than one category. So they're a lot of different types of vendors.

And they're really-- they can give you some valuable advice on what your product, as far as packaging, marketing, PR. They usually have very good contacts within the different retailers, and general sales channels, for that matter, and also work with publishers and distributors. So they can be very, very helpful, depending on where you are in the-- in the sort of chain of development and how much help you want. They tend to actively push your product in the sales channels.

I think when you're thinking about all of these-- distributor, publisher, and vendor rep-- it's important to remember that, like anywhere in any business, the level of service they're providing you, they're going to expect a level of return for that service. So depending on-- that's going to eke away at your profit.

But they're providing something that's valuable, valuable to you. So it's really where you are and what you're looking for, specifically, who would suit you best. And I would recommend explore all of them. Don't rule anyone out early on, because only in conversation will you really learn what-- who might be best for you. Because you'll find that sometimes a publisher may make sense for you, and you may not have thought that was the case when you first started looking at it. So same thing with all the others, of course. So-- Yeah.

So the Apple store. I know most of you have been in Apple stores. We're pretty proud of our stores. We're pretty excited. The growth's been phenomenal. We've got 109 stores, some of you probably at keynote on Monday. We just entered Canada in Toronto. We have three stores in the UK, two stores, I'm sorry, in the UK now, and three stores in Japan. And things are continuing to grow, and boom, this is a picture of our Regent Street.

Now we're seeing over a million customers a week, which is just that visibility I was talking about in the beginning. There aren't a lot of, I mean, there are online click-throughs, but you're not getting the same kind of visibility that you do with retail, where they're actually walking down the aisle and picking up your box. And a million customers a week, it's 140,000 a day, 1,400 customers.

So that's a lot of customers per store. So the visibility you're getting in Apple retail is incredible, and it's that target audience you're looking for. They're all Mac users, and they're interested in Mac products, Mac-specific products. Just showing you our sales, and sales are continuing to grow quarter over quarter. We're really pleased.

All retailers are different. As I'm sure you guys have seen in our stores, we care about some things a lot more than other retailers. Best Buy, Comp, you'll see they're a lot more promotional than we are. We're not about discounting. We're much more, we want the products to stand for themselves.

And because we don't have as much space as, say, a Fry's or a Best Buy, we're really trying to get the best of the best. And so while some things are general, some things we care about a little bit more than some of the other retailers. So when you're thinking about product, it's again going back to what I said in the beginning. Consumer-based products.

While we carry some more high-end products than other retailers, they still need to have consumer appeal, broad-based consumer appeal. When they start getting too specialized and too professional, it probably starts making less sense. to be in the retail space. We always think about being related to the digital hub. If you look at how our stores are spread out, you have the home section, the pro section, music, photo, movie.

Those are the different zones. We sort of see how a consumer interacts with their computer. And so the products that are related to that are typically our most successful products. And we also are always looking at carrying the latest operating system. We're not interested in products that were popular a year ago. We want the stuff that is the latest and greatest and works with the absolute brand new systems that we have out there. So those are just sort of our restrictions.

Packaging. We care a lot more about packaging than any of our competitors. If you look in our stores, we want it to be more of an experience than an active selling environment. We want the packages to be attractive, to look good on the shelves, to be informative, so that if a customer picks the product up, they can quickly figure out what the product is about.

We don't carry jewel cases, we don't have bulk stacks, we don't have POPs, we don't have end caps. We want the products to sit on the shelves and sell themselves, is really what we're looking for. So we're not interested in bells and whistles. We want a product to really speak for itself and its packaging.

We prefer the smaller boxes, and I put that in because some people get surprised when they've spent all this time working on a product and they come out with this big box. Shelf space is a consideration for all retailers, and the smaller box allows us to carry more merchandise. So whenever possible, we prefer the smaller box. It's not that we want to give one an unfair advantage over another, it's that we just have limited shelf space and we want to be as fair and representative to all.

[Transcript missing]

Right store, right market. So that's been Apple's strategy all along. We aim for the 50-yard line in all of our retail spaces, and we have four general footprints that we go in with. The San Francisco store here is one of our high-profile stores. It's the two-story store, which you'll see in Japan, you see on our Regent Street store in the U.K. We have one in Soho, L.A. It is our biggest store.

It gives us the flexibility to be able to carry more titles in those spaces. So, you know, a lot of you think, okay, am I going to make it into Apple retail, and am I not? And it's not an all or nothing. If you make it into Apple retail, that doesn't necessarily mean you're automatically in all of our stores. Typically what we do is we try you in those high-profile stores, and as you get more successful, we roll you out to these other footprints. The mini store is an example that you'll see more in malls, the Stanford Mall, Oak Ridge Mall, our mini stores.

Small stores like the Burlingame store, if any of you are in the area, you may know that store. And a large store is like our -- kind of our -- more of our standard store, which is like the Palo Alto store, if any of you have seen any of the Bay Area stores. That's about it.

Thank you, Carl. I have to say that I think getting into the Apple retail store is probably the number one question that we get all the time. Anybody who's got even the smallest interest in getting in front of consumers sees the Apple store as an excellent way. You're looking at it and you're thinking, all of those people, all of that exposure, Apple Retail, any retail sounds like a great option, but all of those people that want a part of the profit, all of those things I have to think about, distributors, vendor reps, yada, yada, yada.

Maybe that's just a little too hard for me for where I am right now. Maybe I'm not ready. Or maybe there's a better way of selling my product. So what about online? We see a lot of our vendors doing various different online strategies, online themselves, online through partners. And so to talk a little bit about some online strategies, Eric Ronberg, Eric is a Senior Manager for Worldwide Online Apple Retail.

I don't have a mic, so I'll be on the mic right here. Thank you, Christy. I'm Eric Ronberg, as she mentioned. I manage third-party products for the online store. And much of what Carl touched on is very similar to what we go through from an online store standpoint.

There are definitely many ways to go to market online. There is the opportunity to sell direct through your own store, if you will, through your own online distribution. There's also websites, obviously, like the Amazons of the world, the buy.coms of the world. And there's also through Apple Online Retail, which would be another option.

There's also the great opportunity for direct downloads as well, directly from your site or potentially from other sites, which is a very large opportunity. And there's also the large and growing market. I believe there's even a breakout tomorrow afternoon to talk about that further. Selling through your own website, obviously a very profitable channel.

Less concern about packaging. Just really the key things there becomes content and making sure that you're addressing your market and your target markets. Obviously, there's incredible growth history with the online sales. We continue to see the same results within our online store here at Apple. We're very open to the masses. So depending on where you want to target and how you want to target it, you can definitely hit a little bit of everybody through the online retail opportunities.

Here's a couple of other retailers from an online standpoint that you can do. So obviously there's direct through your stores, through your own stores if you were to sell it. But then there's also the other players like Mall, Buy.com, and Amazon. They carry pretty much everything. They offer very competitive pricing, in many cases too competitive. And they're broad focused. The content is varying.

So the content which we find on Apple Retail is the most competitive. And that's one of the most important things. So we're making sure that we provide all the specifications, all the content, and everything that's needed to make the purchase decision very easy and let them find what they need.

So, you know, what about our channel here, the Apple Online Retail Store? You know, it's something we try and present the premier online experience. You know, we try and provide a dedicated site for Mac enthusiasts, a premier destination point that's there for everybody to find the latest and greatest items for the Macintosh, or iPod for that matter. They're obviously focused towards the Mac customer. Our pricing is consistent. Typically, we go to market with what you suggest from a retail price point standpoint. We have millions of unique visitors on a weekly basis versus just the million that you get at retail.

So it is a great exposure place, and again, it's one of the first places that people who are using a Mac or considering the Mac that they go to. Obviously, they go to Apple.com, and then they check the store to see what else we sell. So it's a great opportunity, and there's also huge international opportunities where we have stores in Europe, Japan, Asia Pacific, Canada.

So we're continuing to grow and expand those markets as well. So it's a great worldwide opportunity. And that's just an example of one of the learn mores that we have. When I talk about content and how critical it is, really highlighting the key features and benefits and assets. And we continue to adapt the functionality in our store on a regular basis.

You know, things to think about obviously, packaging, less of an issue, the bigger the box, the better as far as I'm concerned. But the content, again, very critical. Attractive and informative when it comes to image shots and features and benefits. You know, must have the right information for the Mac customer, and again we have relatively unlimited shelf space, but at the same time, we are still very selective because we wanted to make sure that it supports the Apple platform and the Mac platform.

[Transcript missing]

Another direct related program that you should be aware of is the Apple Consultants Network. Now consultants in our Consultants Network are not necessarily resellers. So they don't necessarily resell product, but they may offer other services. So they may do training, they may do on-site services, they may have a number of other third-party certifications, they may be aligned around a specific set of third-party products. Oftentimes they team either with our direct sales organizations or with some of our other reseller channels. And they have a breadth of services.

There's really three different ways to engage with these influencers. And really you should think about the Consultants Network as a team of influencers. It's a very broad community. And though they're not, again, directly reselling product, they can influence a lot of direct sales if you educate them well on your product and give them the opportunity to participate by either making them a part of your beta program or offering specific training benefits to them.

Here's a URL to engage them. And these are all -- I'm going to show you a couple of different links off of the consultant.apple.com webpage. You could also become one. If you have a lot of access to direct customers and you think you may want to actually become an Apple consultant, here's a URL for that.

Or you may want to hire one. As I said, they actually have a breadth of other services that they can make available to your customer. And some of them may be very complementary to the application of the solution you're trying to sell. So I would encourage you to go to these URLs and take a look at what they can offer and see if there's some way that you can enhance your direct or your reseller strategy by working with these folks. Thank you.

Now each one of these are very specific programs, and it's a lot of sort of point places to go and look. Within our developer program, we try to look for very broadly applicable programs. So are there programs that we can offer through the Developer Connection that are very broadly applicable to a large number of developers? And so to talk about a few of those is Ed Prasek. Ed is on our Developer Connection team, and he's the Senior Manager for Developer Business Services.

So in ADC, you know, the thing we're all about is you guys being successful. We want you guys to spend a lot of time developing your products. And we want you to be successful. We want you to make money, lots of money. The more money you make, the more successful you are in the platform, the more you can continue coming out with those great products that you do for the platform.

And that makes us more successful. After all, the platform is only as good as the products you guys come out for. So it's all about money. Everything we do is about trying to enhance your success in the marketplace. And there's a lot of programs, in addition to what's already been spoken about, that you can take advantage of to help you do that.

As Christy touched on earlier, one of them is the Macintosh Products Guide. You know, the guide has 47 million users a year, and that's nothing to sneeze at. One thing you guys got to remember is that when people buy into the Mac platform, one of the first places they want to come to look for products for the platform is back to Apple.

They want to come back to Apple. They want to say, "Okay, I got this great computer. What are the solutions that are available for me to use?" So they come back to Apple. And, you know, that's the strength of the guide. You know, it's got over 23,000 products available for the platform. They're all there.

And you guys, it's free to put your products in there. It doesn't cost you a dime to list your products in there. Customers are actively looking for your products and trying to make sure that they know the new products are available for them to use on the new machines that they're buying and the projects and solutions that they're looking for for the tasks they want to do.

You know, we have an ad program at the Guide, too. So you guys can-- it's not just about listing your products in the Guide. It's also giving you guys the ability to market your products under Apple's umbrella in the Products Guide. You know, advertising, web advertising generally has a click-to-purchase rate of, I don't know, 0.1 or 0.2 percent, and that's the industry average.

The Guide gets between 7 and 8 percent click-to-purchase rate. That's huge. That's well above the industry standard. And again, under Apple's umbrella, you have a very active and qualified audience that's coming to look for information on your products, the things you guys are offering to the public, what they can do with their computers.

Some of the types of ads you can take advantage of is a homepage sponsorship ad on the Guide. Remember, the Guide has, like Christy said earlier, 23,000 products. That's a sea of products. How do you make your product stand out from the sea of products that are in the Guide? Well, you know, with the sponsorship ads that we have in the Guide, it draws immediate attention to your product.

You can use this type of program to build awareness for your product, or to drive sales and incremental revenue. Homepage sponsorship is one of the strong ones. Another great one is spotlight ads. You know, these are, these, the bottom ones, the spotlight ads are driven more for actually driving incremental sales.

Another good one is all the Guide, the back pages, are all category pages, whether they be hardware or software. Customers go through and troll when they're looking for specific products for a technology. So, you know, the ads here, if they're looking for product or productivity utilities, for example, those ads right there jump out at them.

They're immediately drawn to them, and they get an exceedingly high click-to-purchase rate. Another thing a lot of people do is, you know, they don't know the specific product they're looking for, but they have a general idea, so they use our search pages. The ads that are there get an extremely high, I think, you know, like 18% click-to-purchase on this particular page alone.

And it's consistently in our top 10 most visited pages of the Guide. So that pulls exceedingly well for you, too. And then all of the ads in the Guide drive back to your product description page. And it's not anything that we put in there. You guys can go in there and put this information in about your product anytime you want.

The only requirement is that the product be shipping, that customers can get their hands on it. You can go in there, enter the information as much as you want, anytime you want, change it anytime you want, have your ad look any way you want, and have it click through to wherever you want it to go.

If you got it carried in the Apple Store, you know, you can have it click to the Apple Store, give the customer a one-click purchase that goes right to their shopping cart in the store. If you sell it directly from your website, take it there. It's up to you. It's an exceedingly powerful marketing program for you guys to use under Apple's umbrella. Take advantage of it.

And you know, we have an online media kit that tells you about all the requirements for the guide, ad size, and everything. We make it as easy as possible. The cost is pretty nominal. You know, it's not a revenue-driven service. Everything that we make goes back into servicing the guide. So, you know, we'll build something that fits your budget. Again, the whole thing is there to help you guys be as successful as possible in the marketplace.

URL for this is right here. And, you know, if you don't want to write the URL, you can go to the home page of the product's guide. And at the very bottom, it has a link there for the media kit. The next thing we do is we have a program set up with our retail partners, whether they be online like Mac Zone, Club Mac, or the Apple Store itself, and also some of our vertical partners like B&H and Sweetwater and AudioMidi.

And what this program is, is it allows us to offer your products to your customers, an exclusive deal that Apple markets them. So we tell our retail partners, "Hey you guys, you come up with some great deals in conjunction with the developers. Let us know what they are. We'll market them to the world." And we do market them to the world. As a matter of fact, these are the retail partners that are involved in it. There's 19 of them. They're the strongest, they're the favorite of the install base of the Mac platform.

and over one million people use Hot Deals to look for exclusive offers on the products you guys are offering to the retail partner. And this is even bigger than the Products Guide. The Products Guide got seven to eight. The Hot Deals program has a 32% click-to-purchase rate. That is astronomical. Some of the participants have a 45 to 50% click-to-purchase rate. The lowest one in the program is a 15.91 click-to-purchase rate. That's absolutely massive. These people are coming in. They're looking to buy. They're looking to buy your products. And this drives huge.

And whenever the retailer updates their offerings on their Hot Deals page, we let the world know about it. So if you come up with a new offer, Apple is letting the world know through a variety of third-party websites that such and such retailer has the following special offers on such and such a product. And it drives huge traffic. If you guys could see it, you'd be very impressed with the traffic stats. Again, there's some requirements for Hot Deals. It's free.

It doesn't cost you guys anything to do. But there's some specs and some regulations that you have to follow. And it's just something you set up with your retail partners that you normally do business with. And they'll let us know what you want to offer. So the URL, just take advantage of that and get all the information is right there. If you don't want to write that URL, it's easily accessible from the homepage of the Apple Developer Connection website at developer.apple.com.

And, you know, there's been a lot of programs that you've been given information on so far today, and instead of making you guys click through all of the website trying to find all this stuff, there's a real easy quick start guide at this URL here that has links to all the various programs we've been talking about, and tons more. You know, we've only scratched the surface of the stuff that's available for you guys. So take advantage of it, and with that I'll turn it back over to Christy, and we'll be there to answer questions for you later on.

Thank you. I think I'm in trouble. They all told me, make sure you tell them that we're going to put the URLs on the website so they don't all sit there writing them all down. So sorry about that if you guys were sitting there writing them all down.

So this was our Developer Top 10. These are the top 10 questions we get around sales and marketing, different programs that we have available. We have people here to answer any number of questions you may have. So we wanted to make sure we had lots of time available to get to your questions.

But the number one question that we know you're all asking is, can I talk to someone right now? So I've come, I've built my product, I've heard about all these great programs. Is there someone in the room that I can talk to because I don't think Apple knows about my great solution? And the answer is absolutely yes.

So we're going to do a little bit of Q&A. I have a whole panel of folks. We've also set up some specific URLs, especially for the attendees of this conference. These are not email addresses that you're going to find out on the web. These are not on the web page, anyways. These go anywhere.

These go straight into our partnership manager's team over the next little while. We wanted to, as I said, use this conversation as a way to gather input for what we could be doing better around business and marketing services and content around the developer connection. So we've organized them according to the kind of solutions you're trying to build.

These will obviously be in the slides that you'll get later as well. So with that, I wanted to mention one other related session. There is a session tomorrow morning on the Power Users Guide to the App Store. It's going to be about the Apple Developer Connection. So they'll talk a little bit about some of the marketing services as well as all of the other benefits of being an ADC member. And that session will be tomorrow morning. So we would strongly recommend you go and take a look at that.
