---
Title:  Power User's Guide to the Apple Developer Connection
Year:   2005
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2005/002/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Good morning. Welcome and thank you for coming. I'm Paul Kopacki. I manage the ADC web team. I'm here to talk to you about how to be a power user of the Apple Developer Connection. This is a topic that's really important to me and to all my colleagues, 'cause we work very hard to make the Apple Developer Connection valuable to you as developers. So it's very important to us that you utilize it to its fullest, all the things we do. We want you to get the most out of Apple Developer Connection. And...and I don't have a clicker. Can I just do this? I can.

So what is Apple Developer Connection? It's a set of programs designed to meet the needs of different parts of the developer community. It's your way to interface with Apple. It's your way to partner with us, to work with us, to communicate with us, to get our help and support.

That's what these programs are all about. And we've got a variety of programs at different levels, from the online program, which is free and primarily focused on providing information resources, to the top-of-the-line Premier program, which includes a ticket to your favorite conference in mind, WWDC. We also have a student developer program, which is aimed at college and university students and helping them become the next generation of great Mac developers.

Oh, there's my clicker. I forgot that. So, inside these programs are many, many benefits and services and resources that should be useful to you. There's content, there's great content, great technical content, support, ways to communicate with us, ways to access the developer community, training. It just goes on and on. It really is a lot.

It's a little bit overwhelming, or at least that was the intention of that build. But there's a lot there. We're not going to cover it all today. It's way too much to cover in one session. We're going to just hit some highlights, some things that we know you need to know about, and that'll make you more successful developers. And I encourage you to explore all of these other features after the session.

And behind all this, behind the programs, behind the features, are the people. I took some time to just tally up the number of full-time people associated with Apple Developer Connection, either within developer relations, within software engineering, other parts of Apple. And it was more than 200. It was almost 200, and I probably missed a few. So that's a sign of Apple's commitment to the developer community. Like I said, all of these people, it's really important to us that you utilize the Apple Developer Connection to the fullest so you're successful on the platform.

The one thing all these people have in common, many varied talents, many varied different kinds of experience, the one thing they all have in common is... is... Focused on Developer Success. And to get back to my original question, what is Apple Developer Connection, that really is at the core of it.

We are focused on developer success. That's what we're all about. So that's what I'm here to talk to you about, hopefully make you a power user of the Apple Developer Connection, get more out of what we're providing for you. So let's go over the agenda a little bit.

Powerful new technologies like universal binaries, Xcode, Core Data, Core Image, Spotlight, these create great developer opportunities. You guys know that. But they also create great developer information needs, and you know that as well. So the first part of our presentation, we're going to talk about how you can keep up to date, how you can use the information resources that the Apple Developer Connection provides to keep you up to date and current with all the latest technology information.

And then continuing on that theme, we're going to talk about how Xcode and the ADC Reference Library integrate. ADC members have always had great access to Xcode. The latest releases have been easily available and quickly downloadable to ADC members. And with the release of Xcode 2, the connection between Xcode and ADC got even tighter, in that the ADC Reference Library is now tightly integrated within Xcode. So we're going to do a little demo up here to show you how some of those features work, and we're going to explain how it's great to be, it's better to be both an Xcode user and an ADC member together.

After that, we're going to bring up my friend Mike Korte. He's a developer within the ADC team. So he's going to talk to developer to developer about some of the really big benefits we provide, things like pre-release software downloads, technical support, compatibility labs. Probably you know a little bit about some of these benefits, but he's going to talk in depth about what we're doing there. These are things you really need to be taking advantage of to make the most of ADC.

And last, ADC support doesn't end when the coding ends. We have a lot of programs, a lot of marketing services available to help you be successful in business and in the marketplace. It's more than just coding, as you all know. You've got to make a living at doing this, and ADC goes out of its way to provide benefits and services that will help make you successful in the market.

So with that, let's get started. If there's one thing that I want you to take away from today, one thing would be to visit this page at least once a week, ideally a couple times a week. Why? Because if there's any new information for developers that exists, if there's any new information or news, it's going to be on this page.

If there's new sample code, if there's new documentation published, you can find out about it here. And if there are any new ADC benefits or features, services that will be useful to you-- and I can tell you that we have a few new ones that are in progress, and you should see us roll out soon-- you're going to find out about them here.

So this is really the place to visit. It's just a web page, easy to visit. I'm going to take on a little tour of it, though, just to show you how, with about 60 seconds spent on this page, you can be sure that you're up to date and current on what's going on with ADC.

So the first thing I'll call your attention to is the banner graphic. This gets the prime real estate on the page, and this is where we put our Uber message. So right now, the Uber message is well known to all of you, because you're here at WWC and you heard Steve say it in the keynote. That's the ultimate Uber message platform.

But every week is not WWC week. There's 51 other weeks of the year, and we use this space to get across the big message. So it might be about WWC, launching, special pricing on membership programs, other offers like that. Obviously, this is a five-second thing. It's going to catch your eye if I'm doing my job right, and it's a good way to see sort of the big things we're trying to tell you. And that was not supposed to happen.

Battery? Maybe I should take the battery out and put it back in. That works for me sometimes. Okay, having a little technical difficulties here. They're working on it back there. I'm getting hand signals I can't understand. So it's a little like karaoke up here. Can you put the police back on? Because I know all the words to all those songs. He's doing what I said. He's just switching the batteries.

[Transcript missing]

Is keyboard going to work? Mouse is not working. Houston, we have a problem. Still not working. Yeah. That didn't work either. If I'd known this was going to happen, I would have prepared some jokes. Okay, all right. Cool, thank you. Sorry about that. So the next thing I want to call your attention to, the 60 seconds you spent on this page gets a lot longer if you have technical problems. Your mileage may vary.

The next section on this page I want to call your attention to is the feature content section. This is where we publish technical articles. We publish about a new article every week, usually on Monday or Tuesday. A quick scan here to see what the latest articles are is a great way to keep up on some nice, light reading, some key technology topics. The articles here, they're generally short.

They're written in a very casual developer-to-developer style, tend to be easy reading, and they're almost always focused on developer opportunities, new technologies to explore, new ways of using existing technologies, teaching you things hopefully that you may not have known about or may have known about but hadn't thought about quite this way.

We also do some developer success stories here, too. So if you're doing something really interesting with technology on our platform, we may do a success story about you. So a quick scan here. If there's anything you're interested in and you have the time, click through and read it. If not, bookmark it for later.

Next up is headlines. It is what it is titled. This is where we put the news headlines of the day. The latest documentation and sample code is here. This is something we've heard again and again from developers is that many developers said they have these mental maps of the resource collections.

So they really want to know when something is new, when something is added. It helps them add them to their mental map. And then they know what's in the library. So a great thing to do is just check the headline section. At the top, you see a little section which we call the hot topic section internally. Sometimes we call it Hot Pockets, but that's another story.

Here is a place for other news that isn't really banner worthy. These are temporary links that wouldn't otherwise have a permanent link on the home page. So you can see WWC is there and the Tiger Developer overview, a few other things. And then below, a whole load of documentation was published this week right after the keynote. And you can see the beginnings of it here.

So also on the page, you'll see in two different places those little blue lozenges you're seeing all over the Apple web kingdom and all around the web. These are our RSS, links to our RSS feeds. If you're not using RSS, I recommend you check it out. It's an alternative to visiting websites. Some people like it.

Some people like to use a newsreader, like Net Newswire. That's a cool way to do it. What you get is you get basically just the headlines, and you don't get any of my pretty graphics or any of that other stuff I spend so much time on on this page.

But it is a great service, and if you're using Safari, one of my favorite features in Safari 2 is the RSS feature, which lets you get an RSS view of any of these pages. Basically, it clears away the clutter and you get straight to the news. I'm pleased to announce that this week we rolled out topic-specific RSS feeds. Again, this was in response to developer requests. We've been told that, you know, developers say, "Hey, you know what?

I know Java stuff is important, but I'm not a Java developer. I'm a Cocoa developer. When you tell me-- you give me news about Java, it's just noise. What I want is Cocoa. Maybe I want graphics and imaging." Well, topic-specific RSS feeds are a way to just focus in on what are your specific interests and to filter out the stuff that might not be relevant to what your work is.

So that's it. That's the 60-second tour of the home page. When you're done with that, you're up to date, you're current, you know what's going on in the ADC world, you know what's going on in terms of Mac development, it's probably time to start working. So this is a page-- I've got to stop doing that.

This is a page where, as I said, it's a jumping-off point to all ADC resources. So if it's time to start researching your next project to check out technologies that you might want to build into your app or to learn something new, we really provide two ways to get in deep on the technologies. The first are the Topics pages.

The Topics pages, they provide the broad overview. They give you the context for the technologies. They tend to be aggregated pages with lots of links to all of Apple's resources, as well as sometimes third-party resources. You'll find links to the mailing lists here, related resources, that sort of stuff. It's a great place if you're coming cold to a technology, you don't know much about it, you want that context, you want to understand how it relates to all the other technologies. And what it might do for you, how you might use it.

The alternate path, though, is to go straight to the Reference Library. This is, again, another thing developers have told us again and again. Many developers prefer to go straight to the sample code, straight to the API doc. That's the way they rock a new technology. They want to see the code, they want to see the API reference. So Reference Library is the quick way to get to there.

[Transcript missing]

Thank you. Hello. My name is Melina Kirsch, and I'm a writer in Apple's Technical Publications Department, and I want to talk to you a little bit about the ADC Reference Library, what it is, and in particular, how you can take advantage of it within Xcode to find and access information quickly and easily so you have all you need to know about Apple's APIs and technologies. So, first, what is the ADC Reference Library?

Well, it's an integrated collection of Apple's technical resources designed to help you learn about and adopt Apple technologies, and it includes a number of resources such as documentation, tech notes, Q&As, release notes, and sample code. So, currently, there are over 2,200 documents in the Reference Library, not including our legacy technology information.

And, you know, I'm going to talk a little bit about the ADC Reference Library. So, first, what is the ADC Reference Library? Well, it's an integrated collection of Apple's technical resources designed to help you learn about and adopt Apple technologies, and it includes a number of resources such as documentation, tech notes, Q&As, release notes, and sample code. So, currently, there are over 2,200 documents in the Reference Library, not including our legacy technology information. And they're available in both PDF and HTML.

That's over 3 gigabytes of technical information for you to research and implement your project. And we're constantly adding and updating the ADC Reference Library content. For Tiger, we added over 200 new and updated documents and pieces of sample code. Just this week, we added another 100 new and updated pieces.

So that's a lot of information for you to sort through when you're trying to get your job done. Well, to help you find answers quickly, get on with your coding, stay focused on your code, we've integrated the ADC Reference Library with Xcode. What does this mean for you? Well, it means that you can browse and search documentation without leaving your code.

Xcode supports both quick API lookup to get you directly to the documentation for a symbol, as well as several types of full-text search to help you find things with more general queries. And there are also shortcuts from the code editor that let you do these searches directly from your code.

Of course, I mentioned that we're always updating the content. Well, how do you know that you have the latest and greatest information in Xcode? We supply downloadable documentation updates for this. So every time we refresh the content on the ADC Reference Library online, we also make an update available. Xcode can automatically detect when one is available and notify you. So all you have to do is log in, download it. Your local content never gets stale. You always know that what you have in Xcode is the same thing that's on the ADC Reference Library online.

So, by default, we do not actually install all three gigabytes of information on your local machine. That would be excessive. So, to help you find and access all this information from within Xcode, Some documentation, such as sample code, Xcode lets you choose where you want it to look for that information. So, for example, you can go to the web, that's the default behavior, or you can have it use the ADC Reference Library DVD. So if you're on an airplane, or you don't otherwise have an internet connection, you can have it look for documentation there.

So that's a brief overview of the features of Xcode. Now let's take a little closer look at how you might go about finding information in Xcode. So I have here a very simple project. It's actually a standard application template that you can use with-- that you get for free with Xcode. And it's a core data application, and it uses a spotlight importer.

So, as developers, you probably spend most of your time in the code editor. So let's start there. I have here a very simple function that you also get for free with the project template that grabs metadata from my core data document for use with Spotlight. So the interesting thing here is probably this method, metadata for persistent store with URL.

How do I learn more about that? Well, I can do that simply by selecting the method name and choosing help, Find Selected Text in API Reference. You'll notice that Xcode brings up the documentation window and performs an API search to take me directly to the documentation for that method. You can also do the same thing from the code editor, using Option + Double Click.

So now that I'm here, I may want to find more information about other symbols declared in this class. You may be familiar with Xcode's function pop-up. Well, the documentation window has something similar. I can use this pop-up menu to see all of the symbols documented in this page. So to jump to any one of them, I simply select it from the menu. Xcode takes me right there.

So I can find information on any symbol simply by typing it into the search field. So let me do another one. Object for key. You'll notice that as I type, Xcode filters the list of matching symbols. Of course, you'll see I have some Java symbols as well as Objective-C symbols.

Well, for example, I'm an Objective-C programmer, and I may want to focus only on the Objective-C symbols. Xcode lets you add additional documentation filters so that you can focus on the results that are most relevant to you. So in this case, if I want to filter out the Java symbols, I click the "Configure Options" button, Deselect the languages I don't want to see. Click OK. And now you'll see that all I have are Objective-C symbols.

So far, I've been focusing primarily on reference material. But what if, for instance, I wanted some more general information about a subject? For example, Spotlight is relatively new. Well, Xcode also supports full-text search, several types of full-text search. By default, it's an exact match search. To perform a full-text search, I select full-text search from the search menu and just type in my query. In this case, I'm going to look for metadata. Hit Return, and I have my search results.

So there's some interesting stuff here, but you'll notice I also have some hits in the QuickTime API reference. Those may not be particularly relevant to me. I've actually been searching the entire ADC reference library this whole time. I can further narrow my search, however, according to the technology categories.

And these are the same categories that Paul was mentioning earlier. In this case, I want to focus on Cocoa, so I simply select Cocoa in the search groups list. And I can perform my search again. And now I get a much more focused set of results. Including a tutorial on using Spotlight with Core Data.

You can select it, go to the documentation, scroll down, see it's got a lot of great content and some code snippets. So, another thing you might be interested in is sample code. In particular, say I'm interested in finding out what new and updated sample code is available for Cocoa. Well, to do this, I'm going to click the Back button. New in Xcode 2.1, the documentation window now has back and forward buttons that function just as your regular browser buttons do.

It was a request we heard often. So that takes me back to the reference library landing page for Cocoa. And I'm going to use the Jump To menu to take me directly to the sample code. So here I am, and I'll scroll down. I see in the new and updated sidebar that there's some fairly recent sample code, and I can click one.

As I mentioned before, sample code is not installed locally. So, in this case, Xcode takes me to Safari and goes to the ADC reference library online. Well, for instance, what if I were, you know, traveling somewhere and I didn't have -- I did not have Internet access, but I did have a DVD. Well, I can have Xcode use that DVD.

And to do so, let me go back to Xcode. I just open up the Preferences window, and in the Documentation pane, there's a table, Extended Locations, and this is the list of all of the locations that Xcode uses when it accesses content that it does not find locally.

So to add a location, I simply click the plus button, select my DVD, select the ADC Reference Library folder, and click Add. And of course, I want Xcode to look at this DVD first, before going to the web, so I drag it to the top. Xcode actually looks at these locations in the order in which they appear in the table. So I'll click Apply to apply my changes. I can go back to the Documentation window. And now you'll notice that when I click on the sample code, it opens within the Documentation window, because it's accessing it from the DVD.

So the preferences window is also where you set your preferences for documentation updates. You can have Xcode check weekly, daily, or monthly, or you can check manually by clicking the "Check Now" button, which I'm going to do. So this is the notification that you see when a documentation update is available. If you click "Download," it'll take you to the ADC member site login, where you can log in, get the download, and install it. I am not going to show you that now, in the interest of time.

One last thing that I want to show you is a feature that we've just added to the ADC Reference Library. I'm going to go back to the documentation page. We really hope you find what you're looking for, but sometimes you might not. Well, we've just added links to all of our documentation pages for you to give us feedback. Scroll to the bottom and you'll see that there are a number of links here. And to give us feedback, you can report typos, inaccuracies, or tell us what you would like to see more of.

So to do that, you just click on the link that describes how you felt about the documentation, and it takes you to a page similar to the following, which you can fill out and then send to us. We review this feedback daily, and in fact, a number of the documents that we released with this latest web update incorporated some of the feedback we've already received.

So, I encourage you all to go and tell us what you would like to see, what you liked, what works for you. We're constantly trying to improve the ADC Reference Library, and this is your chance to help us make it better and ensure that you have the information that you need.

So, that was a short tour of the ADC Reference Library in Xcode. There are a number of features here that we hope make you more productive, help you find answers quickly, so that you can spend more time coding and less time looking for documentation. And with that, I would like to... Can we switch the slides, please? Thank you. With that, I would like to bring out my colleague, Mike Korte, who is here to talk to you about other ways in which the ADC can help you be successful.

Thank you, Melina. Hi, my name is Mike Korte. I'm the systems architect for the Apple Developer Connection, and I also lead the team of engineers who work on the ADC member site. Before coming to Apple, I was an in-house developer, as well as a third-party developer who was shipping a shrink-wrapped product, and I'm going to talk today about some of the other ADC benefits that I've used throughout my career that I know will help make you successful. Um.

Paul and Melina have talked about the ADC Reference Library, and that can help you most of the way to complete an application. But there are those times when you reach a certain point at which you can't figure out a problem, or it just doesn't make sense for you to spin your wheel, spend your time trying to figure out the problem. This week you've been able to go up to engineers in orange shirts and tap them on the shoulder and ask a question. Wouldn't you love to do that year-round?

Developer technical support lets you do that. When you have a developer technical support incident in your ADC member site account, you can email a question to DTS@apple.com. That email can, of course, include any attachments, like sample code or code snippets or a sample application that illustrates your problem. That email will be routed to the appropriate DTS engineer. DTS engineers are experts in their field.

Not only that, they can bring to bear all of Apple's operating system hardware engineering as well as other technical resources to help solve your problem. The support incidents aren't just to the conclusion, aren't just a simple question and answer where you ask one question and you get an answer. There can be a dialogue back and forth. It's to the satisfactory conclusion of your issue.

With the technical support and the reference library, you can complete an application and successfully The other half of creating an application is the testing. You need to test on all of the hardware and software that your customers will have. Where do you get all of those versions, for example, of the operating system that you need to test on?

The developer downloads of the ADC member site is your access to all of that software. When you have a seed key in your member site account, you have access to all of the release versions of the operating system. Currently, that's from 10.2 through 10.4.1. You also have access to other software that can help in your testing, such as XSAN or WebObjects and other software.

But more importantly, when you have a product, you need to be testing your current applications on software your customers will have. And the ADC member site is where you can come to get the ADC software that you need to test on. You can come to get versions of pre-release software. How many of you were testing with Spotlight or Core Image or Dashboard before the release of Tiger? We started seeding Tiger last November.

So if you're truly taking advantage of what an ADC membership has to offer, you're using your seed keys, you're getting to your engineers, and you're helping them get the software they need to test your applications and be successful. The other half of testing is testing on the hardware that your customers will have.

We all go through the develop test cycle on our local machine, testing on the OS and testing on the hardware we have. And the hardware discount program gives your company access to a limited amount of hardware. But you can't possibly maintain an inventory of all the past hardware that your customers might have. Oh, sorry.

I skipped the whole flagship section. We know that downloads are important to you. So last fall, we upgraded our developer download network to a content delivery network with worldwide coverage. We also switched from FTP to HTTP so you can do restarts in Safari as well as use your preferred download manager. This investment in you has allowed us to serve over 150,000 customers.

We've also been able to deliver over 156 terabytes of developer downloads. Just this week, since the keynote, we've served over almost 19 terabytes of data, peaked out at just shy of 3 gigabits, which is about like an Xcode download every 2 to 3 seconds. So we're real happy to provide that to you. So as I was saying, ADC compatibility labs. Give you access to a wide variety of Apple hardware.

There are labs in Cupertino, Tokyo, and Beijing. The labs in Cupertino are the flagship labs. They have the most hardware with over 200 systems. Everything from the original beige G3 Power Mac through the latest 2.7 gigahertz Power Macs. They also have a complete collection of high performance computing hardware. XServe, XServe Cluster, X-Rate, as well as the software that goes with that such as XSAN.

When you book time in the labs, you can ask for certain configurations, combinations of hardware and software. All of the versions of Mac OS X, both the US versions as well as the international versions, and then all of the Apple software like iLife, iWork, and all of the Pro apps for your testing. I encourage you to visit the labs while you're at the show.

They're on the other hall. And I know that between the reference library, the developer technical support, developer downloads, and the ADC compatibility labs, if you're taking advantage of all of those things that the ADC has to offer, you'll create truly successful applications. But ADC doesn't just stop with those technical resources. Here to talk about some of the business services and go-to-market services ADC has to offer is Ed Preysic.

Thank you, Mike. I'm Ed Prasek, Senior Manager of Developer Business Services in Apple's Worldwide Developer Relations. And, you know, the one mantra of everything we do in Developer Relations is helping you be as successful as possible. You guys have spent a ton of time developing your applications, and they're great applications, and we want you to be as successful as possible in the marketplace and earn a really good livelihood from that.

We're not talking just a little. We want you guys to make a lot of money. Lots of it. Your success helps determine our success. The more successful you are, the more you can continue to come out with the great applications that you have over the years for the platform and continue to do so. And, of course, that's what continues to drive the platform to greater heights.

Some of the things that we have available to help you do that starts with, say, coding services. You guys might be a smaller developer, don't have a lot of engineering staff on hand, or you might be a developer from another platform looking to bring your application over to the Mac platform, and you need some services.

Well, we've hooked up with some of the industry's leading engineering firms to help you do your coding. And the best thing about these guys is they really understand the Mac platform. They understand the Macintosh experience. They understand what customers are looking for. The Mac is more than just the machine itself. It's about the experience, as you guys know.

They really understand how to deliver that to the customer and really make sure that your customers are experiencing the true solution experience that the Mac platform has to offer. The best thing is that we've negotiated discounts with these firms for all you guys. So all selected Premier members can take advantage of really good discounts from these firms.

So you got your code written, it's great, everything's ready to go, and now it's time to deliver that interface. Well, you know, you guys may be brilliant at the coding, and you all are, but not everyone's a graphic artist or an interface artist or knows how to design the best icons.

And the interface is equally a specific type of experience when they're using the applications, and the look and the feel that that application provides is paramount to an application's success in the marketplace. So again, some of the industry's finest provide their services at discounts to you guys to make sure that that application that you've been working so hard on delivers exactly what you were intending to deliver to your audiences.

And like I said, again, discounts for the selected Premier members. So you got your application finished, and it's time to deploy it. Where are you going to deploy it? Is it going to be just in your local geo, or are you going to look to do it worldwide?

If you go worldwide, you're not going to want to just do language translation. You want to make sure that you're taking advantage of the cultural differences of the geos that you're going to be distributing your product through. And again, we have some more firms here that specialize in making sure that your application is translated and localized for your specific geos and are in accordance with the user experience that Mac users are accustomed to in those specific geos.

Some of these firms have been in the Mac platform for a long time. Others are relatively new coming into the Mac platform, but they really understand the geographies where the Mac platform is relevant and emerging. So take advantage of it. And again, these are all discounted services for you guys as well.

And that's just the tip. There's over 140 different programs that you can select from, and all of these programs come with a discount and provide you everything you need, from customer tech support, you know, you can have a company do your third-party tech support for you, to electronic product retailing, to CD replication, to complete inbox fulfillment, and inventory control management. You can learn everything you guys need to take your product from concept, through to coding, through to distribution, and into retail is available for you to take advantage of.

And once you get into market, one of the biggest things you can do for yourself is the Mac logo. You know, customers are walking through a store, there's thousands of products in a store, and how are they going to know your product is what they're looking for? They're not going to spend much time reading the information that's on the boxes.

The Mac logo is one of the best things you can do. Put the logo on the box, it immediately tells customers that are looking for your products that, "Yep, I'm the product you're looking for, I run on the platform," and it's a great program to take advantage of.

It's free, and the artwork is all online. You just have to sign a licensing agreement, download the artwork, put it on your boxes, and away you go. You can also use it on your website, and we encourage you to. If you do electronic retailing, again, don't make your customers read about whether this is the application for them. Give them that visual identifier. Let them know that, "Yep, this is it."

Another thing is the Macintosh Products Guide. You know, one of the biggest things about the Mac platform is when customers buy a Mac, they're coming back to Apple to find out about information on products that they want to use on their platform. The Macintosh Products Guide gets over 47 million users a year who are coming to find information out about your products. It's available in six versions: UK, Australia, Japan, Germany, France, and Germany.

And it's a great way for you guys to get exposure for your product under Apple's umbrella. It's free to put your product in. You can go to the home page of the guide, and there's a link right there that says "Developer Product Submission." Go there, submit your product, and the whole world then has access to your product information. It also has an ad program you can look into to use the Macintosh Products Guide as a great marketing vehicle. Again, under Apple's umbrella to make sure you're getting the word out about your product to your customer base.

Another good thing is new arrivals. This is an electronic newsletter that we publish biweekly that lets the world know that your new product has arrived. Almost 600,000 people view this document, and they're constantly looking for what are the newest things from Mac OS X. They're hungry for it, and especially now with Tiger, what are the new applications that are taking advantage of those new technologies that Apple put into Tiger?

This is a great way to let them know. The attach rate from this is huge. The customers come in, it's well over 50%. They click on these products and they go back to the developer's website to find out specific information about those products and how they work for them.

Another great program we have is if you're in retail, is Hot Deals. Hot Deals is something we have set up with our major retail partners, and it gets over a million viewers a year. What it is, is it allows... we've hooked up with our retail partners like CopUSA, AudioMidi, Sweetwater, some of the Mac Zones, Mac Connection, and we say, "Look, give us great deals on our developers' products. We'll promote those to the world via the web." And that's what Hot Deals does. It's free to retailers, it's free to you.

Customers actively come to this thing, and the click-to-purchase rate is 32%, which is astounding. The industry average is .1 to .2% click-to-purchase rate. This is a 32% click-to-purchase rate, which is unheard of. Some of the retail partners in Hot Deals get as high as 45 to 50% click-to-purchase rate.

So it's something that is great to take advantage of. If you're in the retail channel, go to your retail partners and say, "Look, I want to take advantage of Apple's Hot Deals programs. They'll let us know what your offer is, we'll throw it on the page, and then we take care of marketing it to the world. The world will know about it, and they flood that program and take advantage of those deals." Another thing is Mac OS X downloads on the Apple.com.

It's one of the most popular sections of the Apple.com website. Again, people are... they just can't get enough of the new products that are coming out and information on those products. They're hungry for it. It's your products. A million people a day go to this thing looking for information on new products. And over 200,000 of them download those products.

It's demo-ware, it's trial-ware, it's free to you guys. It's a huge marketing benefit that you should be taking advantage of. Marketing doesn't have to cost you guys a lot of money to be very effective. 200,000 people a day are downloading your products to take advantage of it. So make sure you take advantage of it. advantage of it.

And then the last thing I want to touch on really quick is the Apple Store. One of the biggest questions that we get is, "How do I get my product in the Apple Store?" Well, there is no one hard and fast answer to that, but if you do have a product that you think would be really good in the store, we want to hear about it.

When you submit your product to the Macintosh Products Guide, there's a section right in there that says that you can fill out to have your product considered for inclusion in the store. And every week, our retail team is culling through that list and picking out products that might be a great fit for the store. And not just one or two stores, but our worldwide stores. So if you're interested in being in the store, that's the single best way to start taking advantage of that.

And we've covered a lot of different programs today, and there's tons more. And instead of having to remember all bunch of different URLs or scavenging through the entire developer website, there's a quick start page you can go to and have links to all these programs and dozens and dozens more. So take a minute and write that down.
