---
Title:  Enterprise Messaging Solutions
Year:   2005
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2005/633/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Happy Friday. Thank you very much for attending the enterprise messaging session. My name is Michael McMillian. I'm one of the segment managers here in Developer Relations covering the groupware and messaging solutions. We have a really neat session for you this morning. I'm going to introduce JD Mankowski. And JD leads our professional services team here at Apple.

And he's going to go through, run through some of the third party groupware and messaging solutions that we have on the platform today, as well as end it with a couple technical case studies with some real life examples of people that are using these solutions today. So with that, JD.

Hello, those lights are shiny. Good morning. My name is JD Mankovsky. Like Michael said, I run the enterprise professional services team for the U.S. and we even extend to Tokyo quite often. So if you've seen the Azora project on Monday, the deployment, my team was really doing a lot of work there in terms of Kerberos and AD integration with Joel's help.

So we do a lot of enterprise deployments, XServe rate, XN. You know, we do a lot of just large enterprise deployment around our storage and servers. So we wanted to talk today about enterprise messaging solutions. And it was funny, I hope you guys all had a good evening last night at the beer bash.

So real happy to see you guys here this morning. I know it's hard. I know it's hard. But, you know, doesn't it feel great to still get carded, you know, when you get to the beer bash? It makes you feel younger. You call your wife or a friend and say, hey, believe it or not, I just still got carded.

So anyway, let's get going on the Enterprise Messaging Solution. So first I want to kind of give you an update on clients, Mac OS X groupware clients. And then we're going to talk about more server-side solutions around collaboration. And then we'll have two case studies, two customers who have deployed actually OS X server-based collaboration solutions on the platform.

So first, what I wanted to do is kind of give you an enterprise client update. And the first one I wanted to talk about is Microsoft. How many of you here have Exchange deployments in the room? Yep, it's a lot. So we wanted, you know, Microsoft was kind enough to kind of give us some slides on their upcoming Service Pack 2 for Entourage, and we wanted to talk about that, as well as a few other things. So first, as you know, there's quite a few client options for Exchange to connect. Most of you use Entourage 2004, and again, we'll talk in a few seconds of what's upcoming in Service Pack 2.

A lot of people on the IT side use Remote Desktop Connection, Virtual PC as well, great product. And then for the OS 9 clients, some of you still run Classic and are running Outlook 2001 for the Mac. How many people here still run Classic and Outlook 2001? Yeah, so very minimal, so probably 10, 15 people in the room.

And then, of course, Outlook Web Access, just great for, you know, when you're on the road to connect to your email. So this is the interface, of course, through Outlook Web Access. You know, it's a good interface. The... The nice thing that we've put together with the Active Directory plugin, I don't know if you've ever set that up, but it's great. You can do single sign-on through Safari using the Spinego security API.

So, you know, you should be able to just single sign-on right through your Outlook Web Access if you're using Safari and have the Active Directory plugin set up properly. So it's kind of neat. Remote Desktop Connection, this is the interface. A lot of IT people I know, a lot of Windows IT people that are now carrying PowerBooks, and they're managing all their PCs and all their services. servers through remote desktop connection.

Entourage 2004. So this product shipped last year and, you know, that's part of the 2004, Microsoft 2004 suite. And, you know, it does a lot of things in terms of email synchronization, calendar, address book via the web dev protocol, you know, scheduling, form-based authentication support, you know, some core delegation, but there's more to come. This is the interface you can see here, you know, very standard interface. In this case, we're basically setting up a meeting amongst multiple people with, you know, free busy support.

So, in Office 2004, you know, again, last year, I don't know how many people came to this session, but there was a lot of great feedback that was given to the Microsoft team in terms of missing features in the first release of Entourage 2004. And, you know, we're really happy because Microsoft has been, you know, the team has been really hard at work in delivering, you know, an awesome service pack 2 release for Entourage 2004.

And we actually have two of the Microsoft people here in the room. They're sitting right in this corner over there. And they'll be glad to, you know, take some of your questions, you know, after the session. You can go and talk to them. They really want to hear your feedback in terms of, you know, even more functionality later down the road.

So what's coming in Service Pack 2 is faster syncs, more calendaring support, public folders. So there's been some issues with public folders where some mount, some don't. And they've definitely improved the public folder support. Mail quota usage. So I hear that a lot where you've got mail quotas on the Windows side, but that doesn't work on the Mac side. So mail quota support.

Browseable Global Address Books. So that's another great feature. Sometimes it works, sometimes it didn't. So that's in there. Great. And by the way, they actually have a great article, I don't know if you've seen that, but if you go to their tech article library, they actually have some information on how to integrate our address book as well within a Microsoft AD environment.

So you should definitely check that out as well because some people like, in terms of icing support or you name it, it's just great to be able to use the Apple address book as well, as well as the Microsoft address book. Multiple Calendar and address book support. So that was a big feature. Conversation grouping as well as sharing permissions on mailbox folders with another user.

So this is a short list of the upcoming features that are going to be in Service Pack 2. So again, for more information, Microsoft will be announcing this product in the second half and shipping this product in the second half of 2005. So go to their website. I'm sure you'll see a lot of press release around this as soon as it's made available.

If you're interested in perhaps getting, some of you might already be seeded with a product, some of you who aren't, please talk to your Microsoft rep. I mean, I'm sure they'll be there. I'm sure there's ways for you to get access to the software and test it internally.

So if you're a big enterprise shop and you definitely use, you have a lot of Macs and you use Exchange and you use Entourage, make sure you talk to your Microsoft rep and get on the list for upcoming seeds or newer seeds down the road. I mean, we have a lot of customers who do that. So if you're not on the list, please make sure to get on it.

On the server side, the requirements are very simple. You have to have an Exchange 2000 server with service pack 2 minimum. I'm sure pretty much everyone is running that except the ones that are still running 5.5. And then you've got to have Outlook Web Access enabled. Of course, WebDAV must be enabled and then LDAP.

On the Microsoft Messenger side, Microsoft is also hard at work on the Messenger 5.0 product for the Macintosh. And again, that's going to really add a lot of value in terms of collaboration amongst Mac and Windows users, and that's something that was missing on the Mac platform. And Messenger 5.0 is going to have some great, more secure real-time communication built into the product. And again, that will also be available in the second half of 2005.

How many people here use Messaging? Okay, excellent. So some of the new features: improved security, live communication server support, just better integration in terms of address book integration, and tab viewing, as well as a new and improved user interface to take advantage of the Mac OS X look and feel.

And on the server side requirement, you'll need the Live Communication Server 2005 Service Pack 1, as well as support for the Live Communication Server 2005 Public IM connectivity. And of course, separate CALs are required for that. So, I mean, you saw it at the keynote, you know, on Monday when Steve announced, you know, Mac OS X for Intel, running on Intel.

You saw that, you know, Microsoft is there. I mean, they've committed to having the full Office suite on native on Mac OS X for Intel. And you saw the commitment from Adobe as well. So, you know, really we're very happy with the partnership and how things, you know, the relationship between Microsoft and Apple. And they, you know, they continue to develop, you know, some great products.

You know, I've been to the Mac BU in Cupertino. I mean, it's an awesome team that works really hard on great Mac products. So, you know, they're really to, they're ready to listen to your feedback if there's more feedback in terms of, you know, better support and better integration with Mac OS X.

Some of the resources available off the Microsoft website, you know, Microsoft.com/exchange, Microsoft.com/mac. Most of you are probably familiar with those URLs, but I just wanted to make sure to put those up there, because I know there's a lot of new people in the crowd that this is their first WWDC. So, again, just some great URLs, and those will be made available through ADC as well.

The second big client deployment that we have is IBM Lotus Notes. So I wanted to talk-- give you an update on IBM as well. Current status. So as you know, they released last year 653 and 654. 653 added Active Directory support. There was a bug previously where AD, and there were some issues with AD.

So they fixed that in 653. They actually even released a 654. And that fully supports Mac OS 10.3. and they have a 655 that's upcoming that will fully support Tiger. and they also have a Note 7.0 that is in beta right now. It's in beta 3 and that can be downloaded off the lotus.com/ldd link that you see at the bottom of the screen here.

They also, like I said, they have the 7.0 coming with same time presence awareness that will be built in. They're all going to have a Lotus Team Workplace 7.0. So right now they're at, I believe, at release version 6.5.1. And they're going to add Safari support for both the Team Workplace as well as the Lotus Domino Document Manager. And so both of those will fully support Safari in their next release. and then their Workplace Collaboration Solutions, Workplace Management Client will be also upcoming with Mac OS X support.

And here's a screenshot of their lotus.com/ldd website. So they definitely have a lot of information off that URL, so please check it out. So let's give you an update on Novell as well. Well, I mean, the good news is, you know, Novell is cross-platform. So, you know, many, many years ago, there was a lot of issues where Groupwise was -- there was some features on the Mac that were not, you know, on par with the Windows version and so forth. Now they've gone, you know, all Java. So, you know, really it's a cross-platform client.

And it's available, you know, through -- they have an IM client. They have a Web Access client. All those just run today on Mac OS X. So there's not much to announce. They do have a Sequoia -- their code name, Sequoia release, which will be coming out in the summer of 2005.

and for resources around Novell, please check out their product page and some of their cool solutions at the following URLs. So that's a quick update on the client side. And what I want to spend the rest of the presentation is talk about server solutions around the Mac OS X platform.

And the two products that we've had really good success with within the enterprise are the Cario product and the Stalker CommuniGate Pro product. And those are two solutions, two server-based solutions that run on Mac OS X that run on XServe. And we definitely have a lot of customers. We've deployed quite a few Cario solutions over the past 12 months for medium-sized business. And customers have been, you know, very happy. And Cario is always hard at work in adding new functionality.

So, you know, if you haven't talked to them, they're actually in the data center and they've been there all week. So I strongly recommend that before you leave. I think the data center probably closes around 3 or 4 today that you go and talk to them and see what their product has to offer. And we'll talk about their upcoming release in just a few seconds. But really, Cario Mail Server 6 is a complete collaboration solution. We've had newspapers that were running Exchange 5.5 and, you know, they were getting hacked.

I mean, it was pretty bad. And so what they decided to do is simply migrate. They've got this great migration. They've got this great migration tool that migrates all your Exchange mail into this Cario Mail Server. And it supports full calendaring as well as full email support. On the PC side, you load a Mappy adapter.

And the PC people, the PC clients keep using Outlook. And on the Mac side, they fully support Entourage. So you can just plug in your Entourage right into this Cario backend and get access to your calendaring and your, you know, your free/busy and, you know, the stuff that you're accustomed to with, you know, an Exchange 5.5 or 2000 backend.

So they do share contacts, share calendars. They've got built-in anti-spam and anti-virus built into the product. You know, the pricing is really interesting. And they fully support IE as well as Safari for the webmail interface. Webmail interface is very, very rich. And if you look at some of the reviews, PC Magazine, you know, best small business mail server of 2004.

So again, they target small to medium sized business. They've got over 7,000 customers and over 400,000 mailboxes. They're based in California, Santa Clara. Founded in 2001 and about 50% of their sales are Mac OS X Server sales. And what's kind of also very neat is it's a simple download for you to test with.

And by the way, the 30-day evaluation also fully includes support, which is kind of neat for a company to offer free support for 30 days. That's kind of a nice thing to have when you're evaluating a product. The admin mail interface is absolutely gorgeous, and it runs on Mac, on Linux, and on Windows. So it's very, very nice, very rich, and very simple to administrate.

And of course, another nice thing they added is they added full support for AD on the back end, because most of you are not-- if you have AD, you're not going to move off of AD. We understand that. And they also have full support for Apple Open Directory built in.

So again, a few features they support. They support the email client look and feel on Safari, drag and drop messages. Through the web interface, you can actually drag and drop messages and drag and drop mailboxes. Out of office reply, junk mail, and then that entourage connectivity that we talked about.

They have an upcoming product, which is in beta right now, that you can download at this beta URL, the beta_section.html. And their 6.1 release will support iCal, Firebird, Sunbird, Calendar support, a MAPI connector. What that means is, again, they already have a MAPI connector, but now they're going to have an offline MAPI connector support built in. SyncML for people who use SyncML phones. Free/Busy support built in through the webmail interface.

They had Free/Busy on the FAT clients, but now you can actually set up a meeting, a Free/Busy meeting, through the web interface. Anti-spam and also two antivirus. You can actually have two antivirus engines running to totally eliminate antivirus and anti-spam through and And then later down the road, later this year, they're hard at work at supporting XAN support. So we can actually build a really nice cluster-based mail server.

'Cause redundancy is important, we understand in the enterprise. And so we've been telling them that they need to add XAN support. So they're already pretty hard at work in adding XAN support with Kareo mail server. And that'll allow it to scale to much larger numbers down the road. Resources, again, if you just simply go to Cario.com, you know, from there you can see all the different products they have. And again, they're in the data center, so please go and talk to them.

The second product that I wanted to talk about is Stocker Software. and their product is called Communigate Pro. And Communigate Pro has been around for many, many, many years. And again, they really-- Communigate developed some pretty high-end mail solutions. Their target are ISPs, telcos, large education, large enterprise markets. They have over 9,000 customers and 60 million active users. They're also based in California. They have offices in Japan, Germany, and Russia as well. And they've supported the Mac over 11 years. And they have over 1,600 customers running on Communigate.

Again, they support their standard-based email solution, but they also have calendaring, scheduling, real-time communication. They even have voice over IP. They also support SIP. So you can actually deploy, communicate solution, and have a full SIP phone deployment with that solution. So it's really more than just email and calendaring. It's really a full solution for an enterprise. They also have some advanced security. They fully support SMIME encryption, even through the web interface. And they've got this web-based administration tool. Some people like it, some people less, but most people like the web interface.

And again, it's flexible. It supports dynamic cluster, active-active, through an NFS cluster or even with a built-in or with an additional cluster file system underneath it. You can build a pretty powerful clustering back-end server solution. And what's interesting is they run on over 30 platforms. So that's pretty amazing.

Mac OS X, Unix, Linux, Windows. Of course, we want you to run on Mac OS X. That's probably why you're here today. and then they also have an encrypted message store as well. So your messages, even though they're stored on a large storage array, those messages are actually encrypted on the storage backend as well.

Again, they support a large variety of clients. They have iCal support. They're adding Entourage support in the version 5 of the CommuniGate Pro product, which we'll be shipping later this year. So they're also hard at work on their next release. And of course, they have Palm support as well for people who definitely want to read their emails through their PDAs.

Documentation. Again, they've got a lot of documentation off their website. They've got some great white papers available. So you should definitely check it out. And if you want to contact them, Mark Freberg is a great resource. He's Director of the Channel Sales for CommuniGate Pro. And you can get in touch with him at mfreberg@stalker.com.

So what I want to get into now is some technical case studies where we have some customers who are actually running Cario and CommuniGate Pro. So we wanted to bring over first the Children's Hospital of Oakland Research Institute, Ben Hanes, who's a senior systems analyst over there. And they're going to talk about their mail deployment. Ben?

Thanks, JD. Having a great time here at WWDC. I hope all you are as well. By show of hands, how many guys are in IT now? Okay. And how many of you would rather be doing something different? Okay, that's because we enjoy what we do, right? And we like to engage in new challenges and find new solutions to those challenges and keep it interesting, keep it fun.

So the Children's Hospital and Research Center at Oakland is one of the largest, busiest, and most comprehensive medical center between Los Angeles and Seattle. For over 90 years, we've been providing top notch medical care for children in the region and beyond. The Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, which is where I work, has 43 principal investigators, over 300 basic and clinical research staff, and an annual budget approaching $50 million.

We do a lot of research on pediatric diseases, but a lot of our investigations do benefit patients of all ages. So to give you an idea of our infrastructure, we've got over 400 users, and we maintain that with a staff of three, I'm one of them. We've got a completely mixed environment. We've got essentially half of our systems are on Macintosh, and half of those are on Windows with a few Linux.

And IREX is kind of mixed in. And we really find that this is a real good balance. It poses some very interesting challenges to us. And it gives us a lot to work with, but we do enjoy it quite a bit. And especially with the tools that Apple provides, makes it really, really good for us to be able to administer our Macintosh environment. And along with the remote desktop connection from Microsoft as well, we're able to maintain this large number of computers with our small staff.

We do a lot of cross training between our IT staff. We essentially focus on a particular project and show each other how to maintain that. We generally support everything from desktop and AV support all the way to the research acquisition and deployment of new systems. Our main focus, our main goal, is to provide the computer tools that allow for scientific discovery so that our researchers and our scientists really have the tools that they need to get the job done and not try to impose any of what we think their computers should be. We really let them make the decisions on what they like to use. I'm the lead Macintosh manager dealing with high level Mac desktop support, Mac OS X Server, and of course the email server.

Now we looked at getting a new email system. There are a few things that we looked at that we wanted to conquer. Since all of our funding comes from grants, 60% of which is from the National Institutes of Health, we really needed something that would allow us to communicate with all of our collaborators and our administrative staff and we needed something that was going to be bulletproof. Something that was going to be up all the time and never have any problems with it.

We also wanted to make sure that the system that we chose used open standards. We didn't want to tie ourselves into a proprietary system. So that we can have a lot more options for what we choose to mix with and also give us more options in the future.

So when we're looking at what we needed, the first thing, of course, we want to make sure that we were protected from malicious attacks, virus attacks. And of course, Apple has essentially proven themselves to be very good in this area. We wanted to make sure that we picked a solution that had essentially proven itself in the market, something that was a solid system a lot of people were using.

We looked at Exchange initially and because of these things that I mentioned, we started engaging in discussions with Apple. They suggested that we look into Communigate and we're very happy that we did. We started talking to those guys. We specced out a system from them, including the rack, the UPC, the cables, the entire package, including training.

We didn't actually even need any consulting teams to come in and show us how to do this because it was easy enough to do. We looked at about $60,000. When we looked at a comparable system from Exchange, and that would include a lot of consultant help to help us tie it all together, it was about $600,000.

So essentially it was a no-brainer for us. We did also look at the cluster solution from Communigate, and it does cost quite a bit more. And we knew that it was going to be tough to convince our finance committees that that was, you know, that we were just going to spend a whole lot of money on it.

So we designed sort of a scale solution, a stepwise solution where we would get the single server, and then we could migrate up to the dynamic cluster. And because of the scalability of Communigate, it was trivial to do that. So that's the direction that we took so far. And so far, you know, the single server has been doing quite well for us.

After we got the system, of course, our first task was to migrate all of our users from our existing email server at the time we were using Groupwise. The CommuniGate Pro provides a really great command line tool to migrate everything using IMAP, so we just moved all the mail over.

We also grabbed a third party tool from Wingra Technologies that allowed us to take the address book calendar that was in the Groupwise system and import it into a PST file. We then put that into Outlook and people copied over the data that they needed into the CommuniGate Pro system.

We did engage Stalker for training for our IT staff, so we're all very well versed on how the system works. This was several days of training and they did a great job there. Also, went to the Apple training for Apple certification. They provide some fabulous training. If you ever get a chance to go down there and do the training, I definitely recommend it.

Then we had to train our users on some of the nuances, on the differences. Mostly it was, "Hey, here's some features that -- here's some things you couldn't do before and now you can do so much more." It was really exciting for us and for our users to be able to engage in that dialogue.

And then about a year into it, it's been about two years since we've had this system and about a year into it, we engaged with the Apple consulting team. JD and his team came out and helped us set up a failover solution with the XServe RAID. And we now have a nice system that is sort of on the direction towards the cluster that provides essentially about a 20 second downtime, which is pretty good for us. Our users don't even notice it. The pager doesn't go off, which is really nice. I do get an email and appropriate action is taken the following day or whenever we are able to go deal with it.

But since we're running off of a stable server at that point, we can kind of deal with it in the way we feel necessary.

[Transcript missing]

Thank you, Ben. So now I'd like to introduce Jeff Butterfield from George Lucas Educational Foundation. And Jeff is going to talk to us about their carrier deployment. Thank you, Jeff. Great. Thanks.

Thank you. Good morning. Let's see, figure out how this clicker works. So probably a lot of you have heard of George Lucas. He has a project out this summer. Herbie Fully Loaded. I'm sure you're familiar with it. We get to discover how good Herbie becomes bad Herbie, which I'm looking forward to. But not many people have heard of the George Lucas Educational Foundation.

We were started in 1992 with a focus at that time on educational technology. Then in about 1995, we kind of examined what we were doing and we changed our focus to talk about trying to bring the innovative educational programs and some of the things that were happening in isolation out to the whole community.

So primarily, when you say nonprofit to people, they really don't know what you're talking about. So to make us more accessible, think of us as a media organization. We publish CD-ROMs, DVDs, textbooks. Our main publishing vehicle is our website. We have edutopia.org. We have, I think it's over 500 articles now. And it says 100 here, but I think it's over 120 web documentaries online.

Last year, or excuse me, about two years ago, George went to one of these chain bookstores with the really large magazine racks. And he came back from that and he said, you know, I was looking at all these magazines and there was not one magazine about education. Fast forward a year, we're publishing a new monthly magazine called "Edutopia."

So let me talk a little bit then about the foundation, because we've really changed a lot in the last year. Currently we have 30 users. We have an IT staff of three, which when I saw Ben's slide and it said 400 users and three IT staff, I went back and yelled at my people. We look terrible. But actually we're not really IT people. My title says Director of IT, but that's kind of fudging a bit. One of my IT people is really a Flash developer. He does a little IT support on the side.

My other IT person, she's more of a database sales force engineer. We do a little IT on the side. Personally myself, I do PHP and MySQL and a little bit of FileMaker and compression and XHTML and CSS and a little bit of IT support on the side. I'm probably the closest thing we have to a traditional IT person. we have to a traditional systems administrator.

"I cut my teeth ten years ago on Sendmail, but as you can probably guess, I don't have time for that kind of thing anymore." So our environment is made up largely, because we're sort of a media academic organization, we have primarily Mac users. Like I say, a lot of them come from schools of education, a lot of them now come from print media houses. We have a lot of our people on the road at conferences like this, or educational conferences, NEC is a big one coming up. So we have a lot of people on laptops. We also have a wide variety of email clients.

When we were smaller, this was okay. People coming from academia started using Eudora or Mail App or Outlook or whatever, and we didn't want to interfere with that. Whatever they used, that they were comfortable with, that was okay with me. We're still doing that, but we'll see. As we get larger, obviously, that becomes more complicated.

So when we started the magazine, this magazine has to be self-supporting. It costs a lot of money to produce a magazine. And we had to hire a lot of new staff. And some of the new staff that came in were salespeople, which as a nonprofit, we never had salespeople. And the salespeople came in and they had certain expectations. A lot of them came from organizations that had Exchange servers. And I went out, like Ben, and priced Exchange servers. And that really wasn't going to be an option for us.

But these Outlook users had things that they needed. They wanted calendaring. They wanted to still use Outlook. They wanted to use their PC laptops. And so in trying to accommodate that, I needed, I needed to come up with a solution. And as I sort of mentioned, we were largely a Mac house.

So what did I need? I needed to find something that would run on our Xserves, because that's what we were using. It needed to have all the capabilities I'm sure you're familiar with: anti-spam and anti-virus. Now with more Windows users than I was used to having, the anti-virus was more critical than ever.

But what was really key for me was I needed for my other two IT people to be able to administer this email server really easily. These were people without any real background in mail server administration. And I needed to go on vacation at some point. So I really needed them to be comfortable with the interface.

So that's what happened. We brought it in. It worked for us. The Outlook users are very happy. As far as they know, it just works the way they were used to using it. But what was new for our Mac users is all of a sudden we have these sort of enterprise level features that we didn't have before.

And that was a big sea change for us. Calendaring became much more important, obviously, now that we went from the staff of 15 to 20 people. So bringing those folks in and making everybody feel like we can collaborate but still use our respective email clients without interrupting our workflow was quite a trick. One of the things I've really grown to appreciate Cario for this year is web mail access.

I don't know how many of you, about six months ago, SBC Global and somebody else-- I can't think of who it was-- started to block port 25. Port 25? SMTP? Is that right? All of a sudden, nobody can send mail from home, which, as I mentioned, I've got a lot of home users. So that web client became much more critical for us.

So I'll pass this back to JD. But let me just take a moment to say, as I mentioned earlier, enterprise level is finally starting to come for the smaller users. And that's a real treat for us. So thank you to Apple and Cario for providing that. Thank you.

So in summary, what we wanted to kind of touch on is you've heard a lot about Tiger Server this week. And running the consulting team, we hear a lot of customers who are looking at collaboration and instant messaging within their enterprise. And I strongly recommend that you really look at the iChat Jabber server, because AOL, and they tried doing that a few years ago selling the IM Server Solution, and it was very expensive and really never took off. And Apple really took it, integrated it into the server, puts this great interface on top of it.

And the integration of Jabber Server with OS X makes it very easy, even for the people who are big window shops, to take one or two Xers and integrate it with your AD backend or your LDAP backend, and have this great cross-platform messaging solution that is secure within your enterprise.

And give the opportunity for your users within your company to-- to message and collaborate together without sending all that confidential data through AOL or someone else's servers. And we all know we don't want to do that, and a lot of you block those ports already. But let's give them the opportunity to actually work and collaborate together.

And the Jabber server is just an awesome product that's built into Tiger. So we strongly recommend that you look at that. And there's Jabber clients for Linux, there's Jabber clients for Windows, so it's a really nice solution. The WebLock server is another feature that is great for sharing data.

I mean, you know, this is a big thing. I mean, every time you know you have information and you know what, you're so busy during the day, you can't share it with the rest of your company or with the rest of your team. And having a WebLock server up there when you learn something new and you want to post it, it just makes it a lot easier. And that's, again, built into the product.

Directory services integration, you heard a lot about that this week. Again, you know, with AD, with LDAP, even with, you know, Linux back-end directories, it just makes it a great platform to run on. And it's secure, which is, you know, definitely very, very key. And then, again, with some third-party products like Carrier and Communigate, you know, if you're a small medium to larger enterprises and you want to look at a Mac OS X solution, running your mail and your collaboration tools, you know, we strongly recommend that you look at those and give us some feedback as well. You know, we have an enterprise IT feedback forum this afternoon at 1:00 for those of you who are in enterprise and you want to give feedback to Apple on how we can do better in the enterprise, please go over there.

If you do go to that session, you will miss my advanced backup session, so that is the unfortunate thing. But if you do have feedback, please go over there and give it to our -- to the Apple people, the executives that will be there for that feedback session.
