---
Title:  Monetize and Promote Your App with iAd
Year:   2015
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2015/503/

[!] This transcript has potential transcription errors.
---

[Carol Teng]
Hello. And welcome. Many of you developers out there pour all of your time, effort, blood, sweat, and tears into building some of the most amazing, entertaining, and beautiful apps. The most successful developers, however, don't just focus on building great apps. They also recognize the importance of building a great business around their apps. And that's what we are here to talk to you about today. My name is Carol Teng. I will be joined by my colleague, Shashank Phadke, and we are from the iAd team.

Today we are here to introduce you to iAd, Apple's digital advertising platform. Whether you are a large development house or a small indie developer, iAd has a wide range of solutions to help you grow your business. And some of the challenges that all businesses face are how to generate revenue and how to attract and retain customers. iAd has solutions for both. To help generate revenue, integrating iAd into your app is simple. And you can do this with minimal code. We will show you how, later in the presentation.

Acquiring customers, on the other hand, can be especially daunting for an app developer. As you heard yesterday, there are over 1.5 million apps in the App Store. And an average of 119 apps on a user's device. That is a lot of competition vying for users' attention. So how do you help your app get noticed? For this, iAd has solutions to help you efficiently promote your app in the iOS ecosystem to generate awareness for your apps and acquire customers.

Promoting your app involves three main concepts. First, identifying and segmenting your users so you know who the different audiences are that you are trying to reach. Engaging those users with relevant and targeted messaging in your app promotion campaigns, and then measuring the effectiveness of those campaigns, so you can continuously optimize and improve the outcomes. We will demonstrate how to use tools and best practices that enable you to do both: monetize and promote throughout your app development lifecycle. Let's get started.

Imagine that I'm an app developer. I have a few apps in the App Store. And I'm about to launch my next great app, LiteRight. LiteRight is a new camera app with some super special filters that aren't available anywhere else. It is going to be a free app which gives users access to a subset of those filters, and in-app purchases allow users to gain access to even more incredible filters.

This is my app development timeline, which may look similar to your own. Starting with the design phase, then I'll be developing the app, launching it in the App Store, and growing my user base. I'm currently in the design phase of LiteRight, but I'm already thinking about the business model and how I'm going to monetize my app. Since LiteRight will be a free app, I've decided to make it ad-supported so I can start generating revenue right away.

And I've selected iAd as my preferred advertising partner to monetize my app because iAd takes care of the whole process of finding great advertisers, serving the ads, reporting on and billing for the ads that run in my app. And for that, iAd shares 70 percent of the revenue generated directly with me.

And iAd isn't an exclusive network. So I can work with other ad networks and mediation partners if I choose. But because I'm trying to maximize my revenue and I care about premium, high quality ads, I'm going to make iAd my first call. Because I've spent a lot of time building a beautiful app, the ads in my app should be equally beautiful.

To achieve that, iAd works with some of the top creative agencies to deliver rich, immersive, high production value ads from some of the world's most recognized brands. In addition, every ad is reviewed and certified by the iAd team so I can be sure that the ads appearing in my app comply with Apple's creative guidelines. And I can block any unwanted ads using key words and iTunes URLs. And all of this contributes to a great user experience.

LiteRight is going to be a globally available app which means my users will be everywhere and so is iAd, with the ability to reach iOS users in over 100 countries. And speaking of my users, iAd's solution is privacy conscious, with built-in privacy controls. That means my users' data is highly secure and is never shared with third-parties, which my users will appreciate. It complies with limit ad tracking, and is automatically managed by iAd, due to a deep integration with iOS.

And because iAd is built into the iOS framework, integrating it into my app is quick and simple. There are no additional SDKs and no static libraries or third-party headers to clutter up my project. I can be up and running with minimal code. Documentation and sample code are available to help me along the way.

And here are all the ad formats that iAd offers. I can integrate one or more of these ad formats depending on what best complements my app content and experience. A banner, which typically appears at the bottom of the app, a medium rectangle or M-rec which is good in-line for content-heavy apps. Pre-roll video that are best for apps that primarily deliver video. And interstitial, for apps that have good, logical transitions, such as in games where users are leveling up. And coming soon, iAd will support interstitial video, another way to help further increase monetization for my app.

Now let's look at how we integrate iAd into my app, LiteRight. For LiteRight, I'm going to include banner ads on the photo gallery screen, and an interstitial every third time a user shares a photo. For the banner, I need to link to the iAd framework and import, include the iAd library as part of my project.

Then I'll need to configure the view controller, such that wherever I want a banner to appear, I'll set 'can display banner ads' to true. And a good place to do this is in the 'view did load' callback. iAd will take care of managing the view such that the banner animates in on screen and collapses the frame of my content accordingly. And when I'm done, here is what that might look like.

Unlike banners there's a little more setup required to prepare my app for interstitials. In my app delegate, in the 'application did finish launching with options' callback, I need to let the iAd server know that my app is going to be requesting an interstitial via the 'prepare interstitial ads' call.

And in the view controller, just prior to the interstitial, I can configure the presentation so that the interstitial will appear just before the next screen. A good place to do this is in the 'prepare for segue' method. iAd makes this simple. All I need to do is set the interstitial presentation policy to automatic. And this lets iAd manage the presentation of interstitial ads in the view controller.

And when I'm done I can see what that will look like. I have just shown you how to integrate a banner and interstitial, but integrating the other ad formats is just as simple, and iAd has tools to let me test my integration so I can ensure that I've implemented everything correctly before I launch.

For some of you at this stage, there may still be more development work left for your app. But since I've taken the time to integrate iAd early into my development cycle, I don't have to worry about coming back and doing it later. And I can be generating revenue as soon as I launch.

So now we've launched LiteRight. It's live in the App Store. Users are downloading and using the app. And ads are running in it based on the integrations I just showed you. And here are examples of a banner and an interstitial. And I can see how much revenue I'm generating from the ads in my app by checking the reporting portals in iTunes Connect, or using the new publisher reporting API that is coming soon. Because I've made the investment to integrate iAd early on in my dev cycle, it is already paying off.

Now let's look at how to make other smart investments that will grow my app install base. So I'm earning the steady stream of revenue by showing ads in my app. And some of you may choose not to monetize your apps in this way, which is okay. All of you, however, probably care about acquiring users and driving downloads and usage of your app.

And for that you will need to invest in actively promoting your app which is what I plan to do with LiteRight. Part of my growth strategy is to take some of the revenue that I've earned from showing ads in my app and reinvest it in marketing efforts to promote LiteRight in order to expand my user base.

As more people discover, download, and use my app, that's more people engaging with the ads in my app, which further increases monetization. And this creates a continuous cycle. So I can monetize or I can promote, but experience has shown that I'm the most successful when I do both. We just talked about how to use iAd to monetize. Now let's talk about how to use iAd to promote and drive growth for my app.

My plan to promote LiteRight is two pronged. First, I need to acquire new users because with more than 1.5 million apps in the App Store I need some way to make my app stand out and be discovered. For that I'm going to actively promote LiteRight and generate that awareness for my app. iAd has tools to help me promote my app without any additional code. We'll show you how later in the presentation. And what I've learned from my experience with the other apps is that I can't just focus on acquiring new users.

I also need to engage existing users who have already downloaded because one in four apps that are downloaded are never used. And only 32 percent of users who download an app continue to use it after a week. To effectively reengage users who have downloaded, I need to understand what kind of users they are so I can tailor my marketing messaging and target my ad spend accordingly.

And for that I'll need to segment my users based on their behavior in my app. iAd lets me create several hundred audience segments, but to start I'll group my users into two custom segments. Dormant users, people who have downloaded but are no longer active. For them I plan to promote a special offer.

And a starter pack purchaser segment. These are users who have purchased the filter starter pack in my app. For them I plan to promote our platinum filter package. To create a custom audience segment, let's look at how we integrate the audience segmentation code into my app as part of the next update to my app. And I'll use the starter pack purchaser segment as my example.

First, I'll check to see if users have purchased one of my starter filters, which means I want to add a them to the starter pack purchasers audience segment. Then I need to get a reference to the shared client. And next I'll need to tell iAd which segment to add users to by keeping track of the users who have purchased my starter filter pack.

I can do this by calling the 'add client to segments' method, which takes two arguments. The first is an array of segment IDs which I got from the iAd WorkBench tool. If I attempt to send some random segment IDs, those will be ignored. So I do have to get these from iAd WorkBench. And we'll show you where later during the demo.

Second I'm going to set 'replace existing' to false. Since I don't want these users removed from any other existing segments they may already be in. Now that I've done the appropriate prep work to segment my users, I'm ready to execute on my promotion plan for LiteRight. And for that I'll use iAd WorkBench, iAd's self-service campaign management tool. It gives me full control to create, manage, and optimize my app promotion campaigns and gives access to full reporting.

Here you can see I've already created a few campaigns to execute on my promotional plan to acquire new users and to re-engage dormant users. Next we'll use iAd WorkBench to retarget my starter pack purchaser audience segment to promote my platinum filter package. For this campaign we are going to drive users from the tap of an ad directly into the page in my app where they can make that in-app purchase. And I'll hand it over to Shashank for that demo. [Applause] Thank you.

[Shashank Phadke]
Thanks, Carol. Good morning, everybody. My name is Shashank Phadke, and I'm with the iAd team. Today I'm going to show you two awesome things in iAd WorkBench. First I'm going to show you where you can view and manage your audience segments. And number two, I am going to show you how easy it is to create a retargeting campaign using one of those audience segments. So let's get started.

When I log into iAd WorkBench I see my dashboard. This is where you see all your campaigns across all your apps. To view your audience segments, you go to the 'my audiences' page using the dropdown on the right side of the page. Here on the 'my audiences' page, you see all the audience segments that you have defined across your apps.

For every audience segment you create, iAd WorkBench assigns you a unique segment ID. Like for example, for my LiteRight starter pack purchases, this is the Segment ID iAd WorkBench gave me. This is the ID you use in your code to instrument and start adding users to that segment. Because of that instrumentation I can see that there are about 10,000 plus users already in my starter pack purchases segment.

Now, of course this number will keep on updating as more and more users download my starter pack. Now let's see how we can use this segment to create a retargeting campaign for my new platinum filter pack. To do that, I go back to the dashboard and click on the 'create campaign' button to start the campaign.

I get to choose if I want to promote an app or a product. In this case I'm promoting my app. So I select "app." As you can see, all my apps are already listed. I choose LiteRight for this campaign. Then I get to choose if I want to promote and run this ad on the app network or on iTunes Radio.

I choose app network and I also see that my ad will be running in more than 100 countries where I already support it. Next I choose my bid type. CPC, which is cost per click, or CPM, which is cost per thousand impressions. For this campaign, since I want to pay only when the user clicks on my banner, I will choose CPC. Let's name this campaign. LiteRight platinum campaign.

Next I see a list of lines in the campaign. I don't have any. So let me show you what it takes to create a line. Click on the 'create line' button. First I choose which country I want to run this ad. I choose U.S. And now for my platinum filter pack I want to specifically target the users who have already downloaded my starter pack. In this case I will select my retargeting option to be 'yes.'

As you can see, all my audience segments are listed over here. This was the same view which we saw in the 'my audiences' page. For this campaign I want to reach out to this 10,000 plus LiteRight starter pack purchases. So I will select that. In addition to the audience segment, I can choose other targeting dimensions. Like, for example, if I want my ad to run on specific devices, iPhone or iPad. Or I could choose different U.S. or user geographies, or I can have a dimension of app channels, which is the iTunes category of the apps, I want the ad to run on.

Or I could schedule my ad to run on a particular time of the day or days of the week. After selecting all the targeting dimensions I can see that I can reach up to 10,000 plus users which is more than the minimum 6,000 required for a retargeting campaign. So I'm good.

Next I choose my ad type. It is going to be a banner. And I'm going to choose a destination type of ad deep link. I'll tell you about this ad deep link destination on the next screen. I choose my flight dates, let it be running from tomorrow for a month.

And then for the campaign I define my budget. I would like to spend, say, $3,000. And then I put in my CPC bid. Say, 50 cents. Now, iAd is an auction-based marketplace. So I know for sure I won't be paying any more than the 50 cents. In fact, I could be paying less. Let's name the line.

Once I have defined the line on the next screen, I see a list of all the lines I have defined for this campaign. You can define more lines if you want, but for now let's leave it at one line. Click on "next" to start creating your ad. Now, to define an ad you are going to define your pre-tap and post-tap experience.

For my ad, I want it to be a banner before tapping; I want my ad to run on all devices, iPhones, iPads, so I will choose universal. I choose my language. And for the creative, I can use a standard set of templates that iAd WorkBench provides me with various color schemes. Or if I want I can upload images from my desktop. For now, let's quickly use a standard template.

I can give it a title, a message for my new platinum pack, and a call to action text. As you can see, I get to see the preview of how this is going to look on the devices. In fact, I can get a preview of how it is going to look across all different devices.

Now I want to choose what the post-tap experience I want for the user. I am going to choose ad deep link. Because in this case for my platinum pack, every time the user clicks on the banner, I want my app to open up on the device and take the user directly into the page where they can do the purchase of my platinum filter pack, in-app purchase. In order to configure that, I need to put in a deep link URL.

I put in my custom scheme and for filters, where I want to go directly to the page where I can do an in-app purchase of the platinum filter pack. Now, most of the time my app will be installed on the device of the user. But for some reason if the app is not installed and after the user clicks on the banner, I can take them directly to the iTunes App Store page to re-download the app.

Or if I want to take them to another website of my choosing, I could do that, too. For now I want to take them to the download page. I will name the destination. LiteRight deep link. I associate the line which I created to this ad. And name the ad.

Click "next." On the next screen, you get to see all the ads that you have created for this campaign. We just created this ad. Again, you could create more ads if you want to. But for now, let's keep it at one. Click "next" to see the summary of all the campaign set up you have done so far. I can see the line I created. I can see the ads which I associated with the line.

I can also enter my payment information. Since iAd WorkBench, when I signed up for that, already has my credit card, I'm going to use just that. That's it. At this point of time, I go and submit this campaign. Once you submit the campaign, all the ads that you have created go through a certification process. And once they are all approved, and your line start date is reached, your campaign will start running and your ads will start serving on the devices.

Now, let me show you after you created a campaign, how do you monitor the performance of your campaign? I recently ran a similar campaign which just finished. So let me click on the analytics section of the campaign card to go to the analytics, to the analytics dashboard page.

Here you can see for the campaign, various metrics. The total spent, the total impressions, the total conversions, all those things. I can also slice and dice this data by filtering by a particular date range. Or I can view the data at the campaign level or at the line level, even at the ad level or the device type level.

In the graph which you see I can plot a particular metric, like, for example, the spend per day across my campaign time period. Or I can also overlay with other metrics. For example, impressions over time. Or taps over time. If I prefer to do all the slicing and dicing offline, I can always download this data using the download icon here. All this UI functionality and analytics reporting I can also use the iAd's advertising API if I prefer so. There are so many other things you can do with iAd WorkBench, but for now I will hand it back to Carol. Carol? [Applause]

[Carol Teng]
Thanks, Shashank. As you can see from that demo of iAd WorkBench I have full control to set up and run campaigns to promote my app and in the reporting screens I can see how well my campaigns are doing. Not only can I do this inside of iAd WorkBench, but I can also use iAd's attribution API to measure the effectiveness and track app downloads that originated from iAd campaigns. It is a method of the AD client class called 'look up ad conversion details,' which returns two dates. The first is the app download date, which is the date that the user downloaded the app.

The second is the last click date, and this would be the last date that the user clicked on the ad prior to the purchase of the app. If both of these dates are there and true, that means this app download is directly attributable to the user interacting with and clicking on an iAd that is promoting my app.

So that's it. Over this imaginary journey of developing and launching the LiteRight app, I hope you've seen how to apply the best practices of some of the most successful app developers. Even as early as the design phase, they are already thinking about the business model and how they are going to monetize their app. And with just a few lines of code, you saw how easy it was to integrate iAd into your app and start generating revenue even as early as launch.

Then we talked about the best practices for growing your app by investing wisely to promote to your users, how to instrument your app to identify and segment your users so you can better understand the various audiences that you are trying to address. How to target them with relevant messaging and engaging ad experiences, so your campaigns will be more effective and efficient at driving downloads and in-app purchases. And how to continuously monitor and measure campaign effectiveness using iAd WorkBench and the attribution API.

These are all the reasons that iAd is a great toolset for every app developer. It is easy to leverage iAd wherever you are in your app development process to impact the future success of your app and just as important, the future success of your business. And one more thing.

For those of you who are publishers of content for the new news app that was announced yesterday, you will be able to monetize and promote your content using iAd. Go to the news publisher page on the Apple developer site for more information. And for more information about iAd, you can refer to the iAd Developer Guide and iAd Developer Forums, or contact our Technology Evangelist Team. There's also a related iTunes Connect session tomorrow. Thank you, and enjoy the rest of the conference. [Applause]
