---
Title:  Third-Party Collaboration Solutions
Year:   2004
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2004/606/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

At this time, if you would please welcome to the stage JD Mankovsky. Good morning. Any donuts this morning? Oh yeah? Cool. So that's five days in a row, right? Quite a few calories. Next week is going to be workout time. So I'm here to talk about third-party collaboration solutions today. I actually manage Apple's professional services group for the enterprise. And so we do a lot of integration work in large enterprises.

And so definitely collaboration is a big part of the work we do and recommendations for our customers. And I thought it was really important to kind of review those enterprise solutions that are available both on the client side as well as client-server solutions that are available for Mac OS X.

So we're going to talk a little bit about it, you know, give you a quick market overview, and then we'll talk about some client integration solutions from Lotus, Microsoft, and Novell. And by the way, all those vendors that we're going to be talking about today are going to be coming at the end for Q&A.

So we'll have one person from each company available for Q&A at the end. So let's talk about the collaboration market. Gartner defines this as basically the integrated collaboration environment, ICE, as basically more than just email and calendar. Collaboration today means instant messaging, web conferencing, screen sharing, file collaboration, knowledge management. It's way more than just email and calendaring.

And Apple has some answers in some of those areas with Mail, with IM, with iChat, with, you know, Address Book. And, you know, we're based on open standards using LDAP technology, IMAP, and POP. And we also made some improvements to integrate better into Exchange environments as well in our Mail application.

And if you weren't into- if you came to my session yesterday, you also saw how with the, you know, Active Directory plug-in, we could also integrate better into an AD environment, even using Address Book and Safari, and getting, you know, nice single sign-on type capabilities with some of our products into those heterogeneous environments as well.

And with iChat moving forward in Tiger, as you all know, we'll be adding even more functionality where you can host your own iChat server back-end solution, which will help further the collaboration work. On the server side, we also are very focused on being standards-based. And so really, we did a big migration when we went from SendMail to PostFix due to a lot of feedback from IT folks that preferred PostFix. So we did that.

So a lot of people use our servers as PostFix servers on the back-end. But also, people might use, as well, you know, Cyrus for smaller deployments. And, again, that's a cross-platform solution due to the fact that we support Popeye Map and Kerberos. So the Mac is a good corporate citizen. And, again, we talked a lot about that in the session yesterday, where we fit in very well with, you know, if it's a Linux or Windows back-end or, you know, Solaris back-end, we'll fit in really well as a good corporate client.

But we also, you know, with the XServe and the G5, we also have a really good server solution as well. And we'll talk about some of those on the collaboration solutions in just a second. So let's talk first about client integration and really wanted to focus on the top three vendors that, you know, most of you use in your enterprise or on the education side.

And that's, you know, really Lotus, Microsoft, and Novell. And so Lotus, you know, using Domino, Microsoft with Exchange, and Novell with GroupWise. And the first one I wanted to touch on and, you know, quickly overview is IBM Lotus. And, you know, the Lotus software has evolved tremendously throughout the years. And, you know, IBM's main focus and Lotus software's main focus is really, you know, the on the platform due to their Eclipse back-end development environment.

So, IBM and Lotus, they have a product family that is basically based around Notes and Domino. The Lotus Workplace, which is a new segment for IBM, they're up to version 2.0 in their Workplace product. Brand new product from IBM, and then WebSphere. So really, there's three suites that are available from IBM: Notes and Domino, which is very well known; Workplace, which is their newer suite of solution, again, based on standards; and then WebSphere for the backend application and web development.

So today, the version available from Lotus is Lotus Note 651, which was very well received by the community, and that is supported against 10.1 and 10.2. And again, this product is on par with the Windows counterpart, so it's pretty much identical to the Windows version. On the roadmap, there's some really good stuff coming from IBM.

Basically, 651 and 652, which support 10.2, this fall, they will release 653, which will be fully supported against Tiger, 10.3. And then, Lotus has announced that they will release a version 7 of their Domino server, and that'll be in the first half of 2005. And they will also have a newer version of the client that will support that.

Which is right now named Lotus Notes. You know, Notes, it'll be 654. And some of the new additions that are being brought over to the Mac platform is the Lotus Workplace Instant Messaging, as well as Lotus Domino Document Manager and Lotus Team Workplace. So really good news from IBM as far as, you know, keeping, enhancing their product offering on the Mac side, especially on the desktop.

Again, on that second suite of solutions that is available from IBM, which is their new Workplace solution. Again, they're up to version 2.0 right now. And with version 2.5, they will now start supporting the Macintosh client through their web workplace solution using workplace messaging, documents, team collaboration, web content management, as well as their collaborative learning solution.

And that will be in 2.5, which is in the fall of 2004. And later down the road, they will have a full client of the workplace technology solution that will be coming to Mac OS X in the future. So stay tuned on that. But 2.5 will be coming on the Mac, and then any other significant update will be a full-blown client on the Mac. Macintosh.

Just quickly on the technical resources from Lotus Software, their Developer Works page is a great area to go to to get more information, technical discussions, forums, beta programs, documentation, all that stuff is available through this Developer Works Lotus website. So for people who are using Lotus, it's just a great reference, especially for Macintosh support.

So that's it for Lotus. Wanted to talk a little bit about Microsoft as well. They are widely used on the Macintosh platform. And I wanted to talk about Exchange. And for Mac OS X, there's three great ways to connect to an Exchange backend. There's Entourage 2004, which Microsoft just released. Was it a month ago, two months ago? Their new Office Suite.

Very well received in the community. Great product from Microsoft. And they also have their Remote Desktop Connection Client, which if you came to my session yesterday, we actually demoed. Great way to connect through to a Windows Terminal service backend. And that's another way for you to get to a full-blown Exchange platform.

to actually use an Exchange version, their Exchange Windows version, through RDC. And there's also Virtual PC 6 and soon to becoming Virtual PC 7 on Mac OS X that will support the G5. And so those are three ways to actually get to your Exchange server and get to your email and calendaring. On the Mac OS 9 side, of course, we've been saying for many, many years, it's time to move off the platform, but they still have Outlook 2001 for the Macintosh, which can run in Classic.

And they have Entourage 2001, which is the Mac OS 9 version of Entourage. And then Web Access, of course, through Safari, you've got a really nice experience. So here's a screenshot of what actually the Outlook Web Access looks like when you're actually connecting and getting your email through the web with Safari. And again, we had a great demo yesterday where when we were logged in to an Active Directory backend, we got sent... We got a single sign-on.

We've got your Kerberos ticket, so you don't have to put any name and password. You just launch Safari, click on your Exchange URL, and boom, you're right into your email. You don't have to type in any name and password. And that's because Safari supports Spinego, which is the way we would get in and get to your email through Kerberos.

So great, great experience, great UI on the Web Access side. Remote Desktop Connection. So with RDC, basically what you're seeing here is actually the Exchange client, the Outlook Exchange client on Windows. And basically through RDC on the Macintosh, you can actually run the Exchange, the Outlook version on the Macintosh through RDC.

Some of the improvements that Microsoft has brought to the table with Entourage 2004, synchronization of email, calendaring, and address book via WebDAV. So they're not using IMAP or SMTP anymore, they're using WebDAV. So when Entourage 2001 came out, IT people had to turn on SMTP and IMAP to support the Macs, and now you don't have to do that anymore. Basically, it's all done through WebDAV.

They have scheduling, they have searchable global address lists, which is new, so you have auto-completion when you start looking for contacts on your back end. You've got forms-based authentication support. Core delegates. Access support for delegation. And they've got a really nice UI, and that's a Mac OS X-only product.

Here's a screenshot of the Entourage 2004 client. And in this screenshot, you actually see their new support for Free/Busy as well. So you can actually look at multiple people's calendaring, send an invite to multiple people, and kind of see the availability and pick that hour of meeting that you want with those five people here.

On the server side, what is required to actually have this Outlook 2004 client connect? You need Exchange 2000 with a minimum of Service Pack 2. That's pretty much a no-brainer. Outlook Web Access must be installed and enabled, of course. And WebDAV needs to be turned on as well as LDAP. And that's pretty much it.

So again, Microsoft is very committed to the Macintosh platform, and they've been throughout the years. And a great example of that is when Entourage 2001 came out, there were some limitations, and they actually, in the middle of the year, they had a really great update that fixed a lot of issues and connectivity to the back end. And again, even with 2004, they're also committed to improve the product moving forward.

So again, we're very happy with the way the Exchange integration and the Entourage 2004 client is looking on the Macintosh and for Mac OS X. Some of the resources to help you if you're having some issues connecting, you know, there's some great resources on their website. If you go to Microsoft.com/exchange, or you go to Microsoft.com/mac, or there's also some great discussion boards around Exchange connectivity with Entourage 2004 that are available.

So let's talk a little bit about Novell. And Novell has this, the OneNet vision. And what the OneNet vision is, is you've got the Novell Engage module, which is basically their consulting services. You've got Novell Extend, which is their web services. Ensure, which is their secure identity management solution. And you've got Novell Enterprise that is basically comprised of GroupWise, you know, Zenworks, and the SUSE Linux edition when Novell purchased SUSE Linux.

So that's kind of the four modules that comprise the Novell OneNet vision. And we're going to focus a lot on GroupWise today because that's- people have been very excited with the release of 6.5 on the Macintosh, great Java release on the Mac, supports secure email, instant messaging, scheduling, contact management, task management.

And this is available today on Mac OS 10.3. And again, it's a cross-platform client. You know, supports caching, shared folders, proxy access, archiving, all done in a secure way through OpenSSL. Multi-party conversation, real-time contact lists. They also have their IM clients, so that's pretty neat, that has customizable text, and so forth and so on. They also have access through the web, so web access through GroupWise Web Access Client.

[Transcript missing]

Some of the Novell resources that are available. You've got the Novell product page, cool solutions, success stories, as well as, you know, they'll be available for discussions in our IT lab. So that's kind of a quick update on the client side from those top three vendors.

And now I wanted to talk as well about server deployments and about solutions that are not only client, but also have a server component that runs on Mac OS X. And there are three solutions that we wanted to focus on today on the client server side. And the first one is Kerio, and the second one is First Class, and then Stalkker with Communigate.

[Transcript missing]

So this was announced, I believe, this week, and it will be shipping later this month. So it's really a complete solution for Mac OS X. It supports shared contacts, full calendaring support using the Entourage 10 or the Entourage 2004 client from Microsoft. They also have a great web mail interface, and they also support Outlook client on the PC side using a MAPI connector. Of course, they support POP and IMAP as well, so you can use Mail.app or pretty much any other client that supports POP and IMAP. They have full antivirus support from McAfee, and again, their web mail support is with IE on Windows and Safari on the Mac.

Their administration is actually pretty, very, very nice. They're actually using QT, QTlib, and that gives you a seamless admin interface, which is identical both on Linux, on Windows, and on the Macintosh. So they've done a lot of work. They also integrate fully with Active Directory from the directory side or Open Directory. So that really allows you to keep your directory backend and install Kerio on the mail side and basically migrate from Exchange 5.5 or 2,000 over to the Kerio server. And again, this is a small to medium-sized solution.

So they've got webmail support on Safari, like I said, really nice looking field. They even have drag and drop support in their web interface, which is kind of neat. They've got junk mail filter as well available through the web interface. And again, entourage, full entourage support, including email and calendaring on the Mac side, as well as Outlook on the PC side.

One of the customers they have, which is based in California, we thought it would be good to talk, since we're in California, bring up Davis Ellen Advertising. They've got about 150 employees, two IT people, and they're running Kerio on the back end for their Windows and their Mac users.

Kerio Resources, you know, you can go to their website, kerio.com. Again, they have a knowledge base, and then if you want any information on the product, info@kerio.com. And again, like I said, version six is in beta right now. You can download it, free eval and free technical support.

Kerio Resources, you know, you can go to their website, kerio.com. Again, they have a knowledge base, and then if you want any information on the product, info@kerio.com. And again, like I said, version six is in beta right now. You can download it, free eval and free technical support.

It's been, it's evolved tremendously throughout the years. They just shipped their version eight of the first-class product, which basically supports email, voicemail, you know, fax mail, calendaring, contact, instant messaging, web publishing, and file sharing. It actually ties right into your phone system. And basically you could get your phone messages through email as audio attachments. So it's a pretty neat solution.

You know, very tightly integrated, cross-platform, very scalable. Their version eight was released in June, 2004. And again, the servers they support are both on Mac OS X and on Windows. And they've done extensive testing with XServe and XServ RAID. So again, it just keeps the price of the entire solution, you know, affordable, very affordable with our backend servers. Of course, they fully integrate with LDATv3, and they've got a single server for mail, mail, news, and calendaring. This is a quick screenshot of their UI. And again, they support Mac OS X, Mac OS 9, Windows, Linux, and again, Safari and IE on the website, as well as Opera.

Version 8 is a major milestone for first-class. They have a lot of new enhancements around security. They even have SMIME support, which is great for security. And they've added even a directory services module, and they also have instant messaging as well as presence management in version 8. So those are kind of the new features that are available in the first-class server. Here's a sample of some of the customers that use First Class today. So you can see there's quite a wide variety on the education side as well as on the business side.

So if you want any information, George Matthews, again, from OpenText will be here, and again, will be available for Q&A later on. Stalker. So, Stalker Software Overview. So, Stalker is very well known for their product, Communigate. You know, they're very committed to the Mac platform. They target mainly enterprise, education, telcos, and very large ISPs.

So, it's a very scalable email server solution. They have over 8,000 customers, 52 million active users throughout the world. They're based in California, but they also have some offices in Europe. And Stalker has been supporting the Macintosh over 10 years now, and they have over 1,600 customers that are running Communigate Pro on the Macs.

They are very focused on standard-based solutions using SMTP, POP, and IMAP, directory services, mailing lists, calendaring and scheduling, real-time communication. All that stuff is basically part of the package, as well as spam and antivirus protection. And they've got a pretty neat web interface to manage the entire system, so the whole management is done through the web interface.

JD Mankovsky Here's an example of the, basically, the backend server, again, in Safari, and how you would basically manage your POP clients, your IMAP clients, your LDAP clients, and that's kind of the log, some of their logging mechanisms to basically manage and maintain the server. What's also very interesting about the product is that it basically runs, because of its Unix foundation, it runs on over 30 platforms, which is pretty interesting. And shows their commitment. I mean, it goes all the way back to, even runs on AS400, which is interesting.

On the supported client side, you can see that basically they have calendaring support through iCal and Safari. They also support Entourage for POP. And on the PC side, they have this Exchange connector as well, and they can actually replace an Exchange server as well and use Outlook through a MAPI connector and Apple Mail on the IMAP side. And they also support palm devices, and their team will be working with us to develop and implement the best possible solution Here are some customers that are available or that use the CommuniGate product.

Again, a wide variety of them from education and on the business side as well. Again, a very scalable solution. Here's some documentation from Stalkker, Collaterals. You can as well download their software. They have eval software available as well. Technical support. And here's some information if you want to contact someone from Stalkker. Alice Liprot, and you've got her number and email at the bottom here.

So, a quick wrap-up. On the client side, we've got a pretty good solution from Lotus, Microsoft, and Novell. Great collaboration solution from those three vendors. And again, if you're looking for a solution that also would allow you to run a server solution on Mac OS X, we've got three products from Kerio, First Class, and Stalkker that are available and that are cross-platform on the client side, but have a pretty neat server solution running on our platform.

So what I want to do for Q&A, we've got plenty of time for Q&A, is bring up our panelists. From IBM, we have Brendan Crotty. From Microsoft, we have Dennis Chung. From Novell, we have Mike McDonald, James Gudeli from Kerio Technology, George Matthews from OpenText, and Philip Slater from Stalkker. Thank you.

We're going to take- let's see, why don't you guys share the microphones here. Perfect. And we'll take the first- and please introduce your name, company, and your question. Thank you. Yes, Luis Donofrio from the University of Michigan. This may not be the right form, not sure if it's going to be, but do you know if there's going to be any more iCal to Exchange integrations, or is this not the right one to be asking that with? No, not really. And then my other question would be for the Stalkker guy. Do I need MS-CALs when using Stalkker with the Mappy connector, or can I just use your product and just get more licenses through you? You mean from using it with an Outlook client? Yeah.

No, you just need the Mappy connector. I mean the CALs. I'm talking about licensing. How many- do I need to have CALs through Microsoft, or do I just deal with your product? You'd be licensed through Stalkker for the Mappy connector, which is based on the total number of- So that's a yes? That is a yes. Just checking. Licensing from Stalkker. Oh, from Stalkker only. Okay. Thank you. Hi, I'm John McNeil with Isis Pharmaceuticals. We're a note shop. I was wondering if we're going to see inote support for Safari in the future.

I'll take this one. So there's been a lot of conversation, especially over the last six months, around what we're going to do around iNotes, or it's now renamed to Domino Web Access, formerly known as iNotes. So right now, there are certain limitations when we looked at this, specifically at the beginning of the year around the Safari browser, specifically around support for the HTML, which we're working with Apple in order to be able to resolve. So within our whole portfolio, you heard JD talk about Lotus Workplace. I mean, Domino is part of Workplace. We're coming out with a lot of new technologies which are going to encompass a lot of our solutions into Lotus Workplace.

So one of the things that we're looking to do is we're coming out with what we call right now a common mail CNS portlet that will go against a Domino backend, an NSF file, or the Lotus Workplace messaging backend, which is a DB2 backend. As we move forward with this solution attack, we're going to be looking at a lot of new technologies that are going to be coming out. And if we're going to be looking at a lot of new technologies, we're going to look to support that solution on the Mac versus Domino Web Access. So you can look to see this support over the next six to 12 months. Thanks.

Jordan Winkleman from Lipson Alport Glass & Associates. This is a question directed towards Microsoft. Two parts. Number one, is there ever any intent to have a native Mappy client for Mac OS X? So the answer to that question is that Microsoft Entourage is the solution that we're pursuing moving forwards as connectivity with Exchange. Really, it's not about mapping the protocol that people want. It's really the user scenarios that you want to be able to function in an Exchange environment.

And we're going to move forwards with making Entourage the preferred choice. And second, is there ever going to be any resource scheduling such as you could do in Outlook 2001 or on the native Windows client so that you can actually schedule conference rooms and projectors and that kind of stuff? Uh, let's see, at this point we can do free/busy for other people, but that's something we're currently investigating. Feature request? Correct. Thanks.

Philip Lauer from Lander Associates. I have a- had all those questions, but one more is- this is for Microsoft. Are you going to support in a future version of Entourage 2004 or whatever, .pst support so that we can move people from Outlook 2001? That's a great question. Some- it's a- it's feedback that we've heard a lot recently, especially since we've launched Entourage 2004, and that's also something that's currently under investigation. So, for a lot of feedback about that, thanks. Thank you. Mark?

[Transcript missing]

Okay, we're going to take a question here. Yeah, Bryant Drescher from the LDS Church Curriculum Department. Just a couple comments and questions about GroupWise. We've just been recently using that GroupWise client there from Novell, and we're really pretty happy with it. We're glad to hear that you're putting in some Notify support. We've got people right now running the old Notify and Classic so they can get notified of their messages. So that's- the sooner you can get that, the better.

We have noticed a little bit of problems with stability, and we hope that's one of the things you're working on. And one of the things we've specifically noticed about stability is it has some problems dealing with PostScript fonts. If there's a PostScript kind of font and it's expecting a true type font, it seems to not like that. So just a little bit of feedback on that, and thanks.

Hi, I'm Mike Dhaliwal from Loyola Press. I've got a question for Microsoft. We're currently migrating from Exchange 2000 to 2003, and I'm wondering, with the Entourage 2004, which is a great client so far, when we can expect Kerberos support for the client?

[Transcript missing]

We tend to pick really bad technology, so right now we're standardized on Corporate Time by Stalker.

They were recently bought out by Oracle, and now we can't even find anyone there who'll sell us more licenses, so we're kind of looking to migrate. Now, I'm sorry, I have to disqualify Microsoft from the question because our network guys are rabidly anti-you. It's nothing personal. But can anyone else import Corporate Time stuff so I can transition my users?

I'm actually not familiar with that solution. Our support people can typically help you move any type of standardized text mail formats, if it's .eml files, for example. And you might have heard that we do support directory services, so we can import via LDAP if you have users in some kind of an LDAP database. We could probably help you do that as well. Yeah, it's not really a user thing. It's more of a- it's only a calendaring solution, so I'm trying to get the stuff out of that. Actually, it's not a solution. It's only a calendaring problem.

If there's any way you can use some kind of syncing device, I don't know if Corporate Time supports Palm or something. That's the only way that we've seen. Make it happen. Basically use your Palm, sync your calendaring over to your Palm, and then basically upload it back to whatever solution you pick. Okay. I was hoping to avoid that, but thanks. Yeah, thank you. It's not easy.

Okay, Jason Perel again from the University of Iowa. With the Entourage client, it seems that Microsoft is keeping things separate from the system, such as like the address book is separate from the one that's integrated into the operating system. I noticed that the SSL certificates- or sorry, not the SSL certificate, but the personal signature certificates are stored in a separate keychain file rather than the user's own keychain file, and it's not reading the keychains- or sorry, the certificates from the person's keychain file. You have to go through the client and import it. It doesn't automatically detect it like mail.

And there's also no way to edit server-side rules. So is that something that you guys- I guess you guys are always looking to investigate things, but I mean, is that something that you definitely are going to be working on? Jason Perel: Well, actually, so let me take on the first one about the system- the synchronization of the address book.

Actually, one of the sessions I plan on attending this afternoon, and you'll probably see me there, is about the sync services one. That's pretty exciting in my opinion. And so, you know, again, it's under investigation. The sync is good, but can you use it? Because you should just be able to use the address book framework and not have to sync between two different data stores. You should just be able to use the address book.

Jason Perel: Right. Yeah, but sync services is what we're going to be investigating in the future. As for the certificates thing, I'll have to take that offline. I'm not too familiar with that. And your third point was- Server-side rules. Jason Perel: Oh, server-side rules. I don't believe you can modify those in Outlook Web Access.

I don't believe you can modify those in Outlook Web Access. And so, because of that, we- I don't know if you're familiar with how Entourage is actually communicating with the web- with Exchange. It actually uses WebDAV, which is what OWA uses. And since that's not particularly exposed, you know, that's something we can't- we're limited to right now.

But the Exchange team is committed to moving forward with, you know, WebDAV compatibility. So it's something that might be possible in the future. Jason Perel: Okay. A lot of sites would like to see MAPI support, even though we don't like MAPI, but that's the preferred way to connect through Outlook. So we'd really like to see that happen.

Thank you. And back in the front. Yes, Louis Donofrio from University of Michigan again. Can I ask a question for the Microsoft guy there? How do you handle no reliance on the OWA backend for Exchange support a la native MAPI for OS X? Well, that's not particularly- well, we rely on WebDAV, so, I mean, basically- Yeah, but it's like it's a different way to package a browser. I mean, like scheduling a meeting, you're just making the WebDAV calls.

We want to find out from you when there's going to be no reliance on the WebDAV backend. Well, being that we're not planning to pursue MAPI, I mean, we are going to use WebDAV in the future. I mean, that- we worked with Microsoft Exchange team and, you know, we're going to use WebDAV in the future. And, you know, that's what they recommended because even they're trying to think about moving away from MAPI as well. So, WebDAV, which is based on open standards, is the way to go in the future. Okay, thank you.

Hi, I'm Matt Willis, eCornell. This is to the Stalkker folks. First thing, thank you very much for such a great product because it's doing wonderful things for us. And love it on OS X. My question is the newer versions that are currently in development with the SIP and voice messaging and that kind of stuff support, will that be able to integrate with iChat? Or is that going to be basically a MSN messenger only kind of feature?

Well, we've been in contact with Apple about getting iChat AV to be SIP compliant so that way we're able to provide something for the OS X users. And I'm hoping that we get it since I don't want to have to go from my desktop to my laptop just to have that chat functionality. Okay, thank you.

[Transcript missing]

: Hi, Alan Sanderson from Cambridge Antibody. Question for Stalkker. I saw in the slide from Stalkker that the Entourage is only supported- well, on the slide, Entourage is a POP-supported client. Strictly, right now, as it stands, it is POP and IMAP, though it is capable of recognizing ICS files for invites, but right now the calendar aspect does not tie into the central calendar on the CommuniGate Pro Server.

I was just wondering, because we have been using Stalkker for, I don't know, 10 years, 12 years or something. Great product. But recently when we started using Entourage for 10, when we did a send mail, a lot of our users are getting a disconnect and the Entourage crashes and burns, leaves the outgoing message in the outgoing box.

And we have only seen that with Entourage on the Staulkker side. I was- Make sure you talk to me after the conference so we can go over those items. That would be great. Thank you. Thank you. Gage Boschmann from Apple Enterprise Consulting. Two questions. One for Philip from Staulkker. Last time I checked, the LDAP support in CommuniGate Pro was a separate LDAP database. Do you guys have any- have you looked into integrating it into OpenLDAP?

I'm not aware of any plans to integrate it into OpenLDAP, but again, it's one of those items where you can probably take this offline and see what is necessary there since we've made some modifications to the LDAP integration within CommuniGate Pro in the last few releases. Okay. Also, just wanted to say you guys are doing a great job.

Really happy with the product. The other question is from James from Kerio. I mean, I'm more familiar with CommuniGate Pro and been very happy with the product. Kerio looks- 6 looks really, really interesting. One of the things I- a lot of my customers are looking at with CommuniGate is they're looking at deploying the cluster solution.

Have you guys- do you have anything like that? Are you looking at doing any clustering? We're actually looking at supporting the Exan technology that Apple's been so great to have some good sessions on here at the conference. We're going to spend, hopefully, a lot of time in the next few months to support that.

So that people can have their availability that they need for their server and their peace of mind. But yeah, it's- right now, you can do simple clustering with, you know, an offline server sitting around on the side and we're trying to work with Apple to make that satisfactory until we can support Exan completely. Okay. Thank you.

John Welch, Kansas City Life. This is kind of a request from Microsoft. Working at a company that we're actually looking at moving away from MAPI because we've discovered, like a lot of people, that the requirements of it make it a security risk of rather high note, and it's very hard to deal with, and firewalls and that, and since WebDAV works over, well, the web.

One thing that I've noticed, though, with a lot of Exchange administrators, it's that they're kind of the odd parallel to the Apple Stripe admin who knew nothing about networking. They don't know anything about email. They know a lot about Exchange. And so when you start talking about non-MAPI clients, they lock up because, you know, it's almost like the hands go over the ears and unclean, unclean. If you guys could get the Exchange group put out a white paper too about working with Entourage that was authored by the Exchange group.

They expect it from the Mac BU, you guys write Entourage. A lot of Exchange admins just see Mac BU and go, "Oop, evil." But something coming from the Exchange group saying, "No, really, it's okay. It's not going to crash and burn your server. It's a good thing to do," would help a lot of people out a lot.

Yeah, that's an excellent suggestion. I'll definitely follow up with the Exchange team on that. Thanks. Thank you for the feedback. On the back. I have two queries. David Colville from Key Options. One is any sort of web access. We've been hitting real issues with IsoServer from Microsoft with authentication and just getting the proxy working. Now, it's not really your particular problem, but obviously it just means that for any web mail issues, we get a lot of problems with IsoServer with our Mac clients.

And my other question across the board actually is probably for single sign-on for Kerberos support. I know Stalkers talking about developing it in some of their betas, but I'm just interested across the board if I get sort of some feature requests or statements on when you actually might see some sort of support for that. We have a care-birth support in our product for both Active Directory and Apple Open Directory. Perfect. We'll be starting seeing more of it with the release of 4.2 and 5.0. We have it in first class as well with the new module directory services supporting OpenLDAP.

Daniel Kreitsch from Momentum Marketing. My question is for Kerio, OpenText, and Stalker, because I'd rather host this solution if you guys offer it. You guys talked about email and calendar and all that functionality. I'm looking also, do any of you guys provide document management, document collaboration, the ability for multiple offices to see the same PowerPoint, same Word document, work on it in one space instead of multiple revisions being mailed around to each other?

Document versioning and tracking is going to be available. It's on our roadmap and a future version, but we do have some facility at this time to do document tracking. You may want to talk to me after the session about that. It's also something that we're looking at specific to documents, but as far as our public folder support goes, especially through our webmail, you can have a single storage place for messages that can have any number of documents accessible by any number of appropriate clients with authorization.

So, it's a public folder or personal shared folder that you don't actually have to send a message. Once it's in there, the appropriate people can access it from their web client and access it. Actually, it's supported in Outlook as well through the Outlook connector. Folder sharing as well, so that way it can be shared between those people that have appropriate access controls. We're also looking at with Windows Messenger, the ability to pass off control of an application for an open file through the built-in functionality of Windows Messenger. Thank you.

Hi, Andy Espo. I'm a consultant from Boston and I had an observation directed towards Microsoft and I think everyone will probably agree with me. As a consultant, I like to try to do my troubleshooting through the web first just to avoid the queues in support. And I have to say that the support website for MBU is absolutely unusable. There is virtually no information there and if you go to try to search for support on any of the Microsoft products, you get a little smattering of the Microsoft products.

And then it shoots you off into the general support site and you can do a search on Macintosh and you'll get something that has nothing to do with Mac. And trying to find real hard information to support problems, it just winds up directing more people towards phone support.

Yeah, I definitely hear you on that. We- our website support documents is something, you know, as I said earlier, like we're publishing new documents. We're really- we've heard a lot of the feedback about how hard it is to find support there, and we're definitely looking to revamping that by publishing more documents. Another great resource is hosted by our- some of our customers.

It's called the Entrage MVP FAQ. And if you just search in your favorite search engine, Entrage MVP and FAQ, you're bound to find the website. And it has a lot of top questions about Exchange-Entrage integration. And it's, you know, hosted by our customers. So a lot of it's, you know, a lot of it are real-world problems.

Thank you. Thank you. In the back. Hi, my name is Vinay Varghese. I'm from Cornell University Medical College. My question to you is about address books and basically finding ways of publishing address books, both personal address books and basically departmental address books in an- ideally in a- in an LDAP-type directory.

And this is something that we've really been stumped on in finding a product that is truly cross-class, that has a lot of value. And so I just wanted to ask you about that. And if you could tell us a little bit more about that. And we'll get back to you in just a few minutes.

Thank you. and available to Macs and PCs alike that our users are able to use that is authenticatable and available both over the web and through their email clients. Do any of you folks support something like this? Is it something that is readily available now, the products that you can recommend?

Do your products currently support it? So the requirement specifically is to have one's personal address book stored in the directory and also to have a departmental address book that a group of people can share so that and that we can control the permissions through some kind of ACLs and ideally we'd like to store it in an LDAP directory.

Okay, our product lets you have public folders to which you can assign public contacts for example if you wanted to create a company directory and we have a built-in LDAP server so that can be shared via LDAP for example if you're with your mail client on Mac but those public folders are also supported through Outlook client and through webmail and again individuals can also create their own shared contacts as we call them. It's basically authorized someone with the administrators help to access their own clients again through those same either the webmail or through Outlook.

Yeah, first class will include Director Services in version 8, which will do all or most of what you dream about. So visit our website or talk to me after the show. GroupWise does that as well. It does it on Mac OS X, Linux, Windows. We use eDirectory and we can go across Tree, across WAN, and there's a bunch of things if you want to talk afterwards that you can do there.

[Transcript missing]

So a lot of the requirements you've described I think can be solved by Exchange, and as we've discussed so far, Exchange can be accessed by a Mac and a PC. I think we also- Exchange also exposes the information through LDAP, so if that sounds like something that would meet your needs as well, I'd be happy to take that offline.

For the address books that are created in web-based mail as well as through Outlook via the Mappy connector, those can be shared across the entire system or between various locations. The LDAP server built in to CommuniGate Pro can also contain address book information that would be accessible via LDAP searches or via the webmail interface as well. Thank you. Thank you.

Question for Microsoft again. What is your solution for integrating with enterprise- or sorry, Exchange instant messaging servers? At this time, there is currently no integration with Exchange instant messaging services, but that's something we've recently heard a lot about, and so it's something we're investigating for the future. Okay. Thank you. On the back. Yeah, Alan Sampson, Cambridge Interpol again. Quick question for you, JD. Why no meeting maker here?

They do the best collaborative, you know, calendaring system. Good point. And I know Apple use it too, so. Yep, thank you. Hi, good morning. Jess Frickholm, Vertex Pharmaceuticals. Question for the gentleman from Lotus. We are looking to implement a corporate instant messaging solution, so obviously we're looking at same time.

I can see from the presentation here that there's long-term goals for that. I'm wondering if you could comment on what, if anything, we could get in the next 12 months. Sure. So, if you notice the slides that JD presented at the beginning of this presentation, we had a list of what we call our extended products.

So, we looked at DOMDOC, we looked at Lotus SameTime, and we've put a timeframe, and we're committing to this timeframe to be able to give you this solution within the 6.5.4 and the 7.0 timeframe, which is going to be the first half of next year. So, for the Mac users who are running the Lotus Notes client and are looking for IM capabilities, we'll be able to provide that in the first half of next year. Okay.

That will be- Will it be a separate, like a standalone application? Correct. It will not be an integration like we have within the Notes client on Windows today. It will be a separate, very similar to what you see right now, the SameTime Connect client, which is separate, but it won't be integration within the inbox. Thank you. Sure.

Max, Kenneth Alexander from Kerio Technologies. Actually, I have a question for Microsoft. You know, with the MSDN, we as IT and we as developers can get all of the Windows software that we need to evaluate for deploying in our enterprise and for developing our software, except for the MacBU software. Is there any plans or is there any reason that this software isn't part of the MSDN, or is there any plans to have a similar project or product that we can subscribe to? Yeah, that's a great question.

And to be honest, I actually don't know. Most of the CDN- most, as you pointed out, all the software on the MSDN stuff is- are for Windows, and well, that's not really useful for my Mac. You know, I- well, I'll- we'll exchange information later. I'll get- get you an answer for that. Great! That would be great. Thank you. Okay, thank you very much for- for attending, and have a great Friday afternoon. Thank you.
