---
Title:  Enhanced Learning with QuickTime
Year:   2004
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2004/711/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Good morning. Thanks for waking up with us this morning and coming to check out this great session. This is session number 711, Enhanced Learning with QuickTime. And I'm very happy to introduce our speaker. He was one of the most highly critically acclaimed speakers last year. So it was a no-brainer to invite him back. So I'd like to introduce to you David Egbert.

[Transcript missing]

Okay, here we go. Now this is an oldie but a goodie, probably about four years old that we created. It's been remodified here using some modern tools. This is a picture of Mona Lisa, right? And did you know that the painter of the Mona Lisa, Leonardo da Vinci, let's get it going here, there we go. Look at that resemblance. Isn't that kind of spooky?

A professor requested this, and originally we did this in another authoring tool, but this is a great example of being able to compare and contrast, right? You've got two images and you want to compare them. Wow, this is great. So we brought the Mona Lisa into Photoshop, put Leonardo da Vinci right on top, saved about as two images, brought it into iPhoto, and saved it out as a QuickTime movie. That allowed us to put that transition in there. So it was really easy to be able to do this.

Now, the professor loves this because in the past, the professor had transparencies, right? He's flipping the transparencies in and out, trying to get it to line up or whatever. It just didn't work right. But now, with the projector in the classroom and the computer, they can pull this up and use it in the classroom.

The professor also has this in his online course, so the students can go back and kind of fool around with it as well. So, just a quick and easy way to be able to compare and contrast two different images. Here's something a little bit more advanced. This was done for a cinematography class where they wanted to show the students the difference between an unrestored and a restored video clip.

There we go. So there's the unrestored version. If we click this button, we get the restored version. If you click back here, we get the old version, right? This is something QuickTime does extremely well, and that is the ability to swap tracks out, video tracks, audio tracks. It's really easy to do this inside of some of the authoring tools that are available for QuickTime.

This is really hard to do in other technologies, especially the fact that when you click that button, it's syncing. It's frame-level accuracy syncing. It's swapping out those tracks right at the frame. It's great. So let's look at another example. Here's another one. A professor brought in a series of images that they had taken.

"We've been shooting some flames. Now each one of those quadrants, they've added a little bit different property to the flame. And they wanted to be able to analyze all the flames at the same time. So what we did here is that these are all image sequences, right? So we brought in each, created a separate movie for each one of those, and then we combined all the movies together, right? And now they're playing together with frame-accurate synchronicity all together. Now we added a little twist to this.

They also wanted to be able to take this little square here and move it around and analyze just that specific portion of that little flame, right? So after we actually created most of that, we created the frames with QuickTime Player Pro. We added a little time code track so they could stop the clip. At any point and just analyze that still frame. And then we brought in the live stage to be able to add the interactivity.

That we could move around that little square so they could analyze a specific portion of that flame. Not terribly tough as far as the authoring is concerned. Let's move on. Here's a digitized film strip. We've got all kinds of film strips, you know, with the audio cassettes in our libraries. This one, let's bring it up.

There we go. This one's in Russian. And the students were required to check out the film strip and the cassette tape from our LRC. And this thing was deteriorating really fast. So they wanted to archive it and just save the original version and make this available digitally. We created this. We digitized it. We scanned the slides. We digitized the cassette and put this together with QuickTime Player Pro.

It wasn't terribly tough. In fact, I'll show you how to do this today. Now there were some copyright issues and things like that. And fortunately on our campus we have a copyright and licensing office. So we don't have to worry about the copyright issues. They do. So once it's cleared, we have the go ahead to go ahead and digitize these materials. So this is a great example of being able to repurpose materials. And make it available in digital form so that the originals will be archived and safe.

That was another great example also of language learning. You've got to learn foreign languages, you've got to listen and you've got to know, listen to the native voice. Here's another language learning example. This is another oldie. This is about four years old. Here's a video clip that has, this is kind of like a DVD, right? You've got the French audio, you've got... The English audio. And again, you can swap the tracks at any time while you're viewing the clip.

What a great way to be able to learn a foreign language, at least starting out learning a foreign language. You can flip through the tracks. There's also an English subtitle. You can turn the subtitle off if you want or not. So you can listen to the French and read the English. Try to get that going or listen to the English audio. Just another thing that QuickTime does extremely well, and that is that swapping of the tracks. Okay, here's another really simple example.

The professor, this is an entry level class, and the professor was tired of bringing the students into the lab. Every single class, putting that steel rod in that machine and showing the students how that gets stretched and what's going on here. So what we did is we recorded the experiment and added a little flash track down here that shows what the meters are doing. This is great because this frees up the lab for the higher level classes for their experiments, right? And it still gives the students the ability to kind of see what's going on with the steel. The professor uses this in the classroom.

And again, makes that available in his online course so the students can check it out and review it later on. Another great, pretty simple way to create an instructional object. Okay. Alright, this was done for another professor. This is using, this professor wanted to combine assessment with the video clips.

I kind of wanted to help the students a little bit in helping to retain some of the information they did. So what we did is we created, this is just a QuickTime movie with an href track at the very end. So if you skip to the very end.

It has an href track that takes you to a question, an assessment piece, right? Now this is self-assessment. The student just comes in here and can check their answers. But nonetheless, this is another technique that you can use to help your students, help them comprehend the materials that you're doing. This is kind of a template that we created for them and then the professor went and took this and created a whole website. Again, if I skip to the end here, there's just a little href track that at the very end takes you to an assessment piece.

Again, not very difficult to do and we'll show you how to create href tracks here in just a minute. Alright, here's another fun little example. This one's 24 kilobytes. It's a little drill and practice. Computers are great for drill and practice because they never get tired, right? So sometimes they call it drill and kill. So here, let's see, I'm supposed to find an interval here. Doggone it. Let's see here. Let's get one right.

What's cool about this is that it leverages the QuickTime instruments, kind of the MIDI playback that's inside of QuickTime, so it's extremely lightweight. And it has all kinds of potential. We've got some really interesting examples in testing with music and things like that. This one also, you can test the interval as you... Again, this was done with Live Stage and it leverages those QuickTime instruments, which makes it really lightweight. So the students can just drill and kill until the cows come home. Alright, here's another one. This one's a listening guide. Originally this was done in Flash. I think it was like Flash 2 or something, Flash 3.

But we brought it into QuickTime because it seemed, at the time, it seemed to perform just a little bit better. So what this is, is a listening guide, right? We've got the Beethoven's Fifth going in the background. We've got some visual information. It's also interactive, so if you want to just skip to the French horns.

Terrific. Oh, let's see, what's the CODA sound like? The professor can use this in the classroom, right? And in the past, the students had a set of CDs and the workbook, and they'd have to find the track on the CD player and look in the right page and kind of sync them up as they're learning. Now, we can do that all on the screen, right? And it's interactive, so they can jump through, and you can use this in all kinds of different ways.

Again, pretty easy to put together in Flash. Here's another one. Video, of course, is great for performance analysis. Can you hear that? No? "Performance analysis, especially when a movement is involved, right? So what we have here is the professor just sitting by the camera with the microphone, videotaping the student."

Giving some feedback as they're dancing. This is great because the professor really loves this. And the technology has come down now that we don't even have to do anything now. The professor knows the whole workflow. Has students help him shoot the video clips. In fact, every, of course the course is broken up into units. And every single unit, the end of the unit, every single student in the class gets some video feedback. And the students love that. They can go through and review that clip multiple times. And he'll lead us on the fourth.

And it just makes it a little bit more convenient for the student as well. All the video clips are up online on the course site. And a great simple, it's really not that high tech, he's just sitting by the camera offering feedback as they're dancing. Great example of kind of a low threshold technology that you can use.

Okay, let's see, what else we got? Okay, time lapse photography is also kind of a fun thing you can do. Turn that down a little bit. Of course this is really easy to do with QuickTime Player Pro. There's an option in there that you can import an image sequence.

After we did this, we thought, the next rev what we're going to do is actually put the times in there and maybe add a chapter track or something that you could kind of jump through specific times. All kinds of interesting things there. Okay, so we've kind of got a broad range.

Now let me show you some presentations. This next presentation was done in Smile. And what we've done is basically, let's see here, open it up in QuickTime player. This particular example is basically synchronizing video with slides, right? But we've added a few extra things. We've added a table of contents and you can click on the table of contents and it'll go. There we go.

We also have a chapter track down here. You can jump to a specific place with the chapter track. And we have a caption as well. And we'll show you how to put this together. But the advantage of using Smile, of course, is that it's a text-based markup language. So editing this material is really easy. You just go in and change some of the parameters in the text and those things are immediately changed.

This particular example also, I'll make available at least the source code for the Smile piece as a download. So if you want to check it out and kind of see how all those things are put together, you'll have access to that as well. So there's an example with Smile. Here's the example of the same thing as an href track, using a href track and using HTML frames instead.

This is another advantage. Now if the professor has a lot of HTML files that he wants synchronized, this is a great way to do that. I'm sorry that the audio wasn't quite as loud. Again, you have a chapter track here, so if you want to jump to a specific piece.

In order for you to make an intelligent and informed decision... This is extremely lightweight because it's just HTML over in this frame here. It makes it so that you can embed other materials, flash files, other movie clips, those kinds of things there. And we'll show you how to put together an HREF track presentation. Okay, now this, I really want to show you this one.

Sorry about the audio. This one is just one slide. It's just very short. And I want you to pay attention to the quality of the video. I'm going to return to this later in some slides. This particular professor really wanted us to shoot him inside the classroom. And I think there's some disadvantages to doing that. One is the lighting was extremely challenging. The other one, we just missed it there, but the student is actually answering a question and at the time we weren't set up with the proper micing and things like that. This is kind of a lessons learned example.

Also with this particular piece, the content, he's talking with the students, well, I'll leave it to another slide. Another thing that it does, measuring this is... So there's shooting a professor inside the classroom. Let's contrast that with another... This presentation was shot in a studio. The professor is reading a script off a teleprompter. And there's some reasons why we really prefer this. And we'll discuss it here shortly.

This particular piece was created in Live Stage. And one thing we really like about Live Stage is the ability to sync this right down inside of a nice GUI to the frame level. And then talk about how to implement those three elements in a good, reasonable way. Again, we have a chapter track down here so we can jump to specific points in this piece. Let's just go down to agenda. We're ready to move to the fourth part of the preview, and that is the agenda statement. Now the agenda is just a listing of the main points that we're going to talk about.

Okay, great. Let's see. Let's show you one more. This is kind of over the top. This particular example. What is statistics? You know, I really hate to say it, but this particular professor is kind of boring. It's statistics, and the students were getting really bored. So one thing that we did is that we enabled multi-speed control, and the students love this. This is really cool because, you know, our human minds, we can comprehend hundreds of words per minute, right?

And yet, a lot of times we're just stuck on one speed. So this allows the students to actually get through more material in the same time frame, right? Another thing is you have to kind of focus on what the person is saying as they're speaking fast. So it helps the students kind of focus in on the content. I'm going to show you how to do this today. I think this is really important. I think you guys can really benefit from what's going on here.

So this is a quick example of how you can do this. So you can publish a result. Now this was done in Live Stage 2, and this has a few more, well, it has a table of contents again, and some extra buttons and links to different things. And this one actually later on in the presentation has some areas where the presentation stops, and you have to answer a few questions, and then continue on. There's all kinds of great things you can do inside the video clip itself. Now, one thing that I haven't mentioned yet is that these slides here are still slides, right? We're not talking hundreds of frames.

It's not a hundred frames per second. It's a still slide that lasts for, you know, X amount of seconds. So these can be extremely lightweight. And of course, it's all inside a QuickTime movie, so it makes it really easy to make this thing portable and transport it around.

We can throw this on a CD. We can throw it up on the web page. There's all kinds of interesting things we can do once it's a QuickTime movie. So I think that ends the kind of the dog and pony show here. Can we go back to slides, please?

Okay, here we go. So let's talk about why you would want to create synchronized lectures. You know, it takes some time and it takes some resources. So there better be some important reasons why that we spend the amount of time and money to do these things. Of course, probably the number one thing is that it supports different learning styles. Students out there learn in different ways. Some learn more by listening. Some learn more by viewing visuals. Some learn more by just reading. And we want to be able to accommodate those different learning styles. I think some of the things I showed today help accommodate those things.

It also involves more of the senses. There are studies that show that when you involve more of the senses in the learning process, that the students retain that information better. And definitely we're using a lot of the senses when we're creating these types of presentations. Probably the number one feedback from the students is that it's convenient and it's flexible. In the past, they've had to go to these lectures at specific set times. Now, in a lot of our classes, what we do, we do kind of a hybrid model where half, you know, the class met two times a week.

Now, they only meet one time a week, and that other class time, they're assigned to go through these lectures, the synchronized lectures. That allows them, at the other time that they meet in class, to do more active group-type activities, more active learning-type activities in the classroom. And students really love that.

They can focus in on the content. A lot of times in the lectures, when you're in a live lecture, there are students that ask really stupid questions and hold the rest of the class back. Now, if there's a question, a lot of times the students can go and review those materials again and again in the lecture. And if they still don't get it, then they can ask the professor online.

It kind of helps in time and not wasting everybody's time in the lecture. Of course, you can review multiple sections. You can jump straight to content. So if you have a phone call and then you want to get back to your lesson, you can jump straight to that lesson. And there are some ways that you can make it searchable as well.

Let's see, what else we got here? So what kind of features are we looking for? We took a really hard look at what kind of features we wanted in a synchronized lecture. And we did a pretty good survey, I think, even building some of our own little things in different architectures. And this is kind of the list that we came up with. It has to be cross-platform. All too often, especially in our IT department, it's always Windows only. And they forget about that there's other operating systems out there, especially the Macintosh.

And so we want to make this thing as cross-platform as possible. And most of our users are using either Windows or Macintosh on campus. And so QuickTime is just a natural fit for that. We want full transport control. We want to be able to stop that at any moment. We want to be able to jump to specific points. We want full transport control. We want a nice table of contents that the student can navigate so they know exactly where they are and they can jump to specific points.

Of course, we want the slides and the audio and video to be synchronized. And we want the synchronization to be tight. We don't want it after a second after they're talking about it to have materials show up. We want synchronicity. Compliant with accessibility standards. That's a very important thing for us as well. Of course, you should be familiar with Section 508 and also the accessibility guidelines by the WC3. I'll have some more slides on that later.

Let's see, we need a progress indicator. We need to let students know how long this particular lecture is and where they are in that particular lecture. We also need support. It needs to be flexible enough that we can create a single lesson or we can combine multiple lessons in a single file. And probably most importantly, we need options to be able to deploy this. How many of you are familiar with Acacia?

Well, there's some patent suits going on right now and some educational institutions are being sued because of these patent suits that have to do with distributing video online. Now they're going after cell phone and satellite companies and all kinds of interesting things. It's going to be very interesting how this plays out. But we want some options to be able to bypass some of these legal issues that are currently available or are currently there. Here's some of the things that we looked at. We looked at Breeze.

Of course, the architecture of Breeze is built off. It's built off of a flash communication server. It has all kinds of really interesting things. But we found that we already have a course management system, Blackboard, that we use on campus. That's kind of the direction we got. So there's all kinds of bells and whistles that we really don't need inside of Breeze.

Plus, the pricing is a little steep right now. And we wanted to look for other solutions. Microsoft Producer is another solution that's out there. But of course, it's Windows only. There was a lot of work on that. There was a short time frame where Internet Explorer for Mac was compatible. But since that's gotten the axe, it really is a non-solution for us. Empatica and also Flash MX 2004 are other solutions that are out there.

Incidentally, Flash is really pushing hard their video solution. And we've kind of hit the wall with some issues maybe you have too with trying to synchronize things, especially to the frame level. We ended up having to basically keyframe every frame in the video clip to be able to jump to specific points. Love to talk to anybody about that if you want to afterwards.

Alright, so why QuickTime? Well, probably number one on there is high quality. We have so much flexibility in there that it really allows us to kind of fine tune things. And we just noticed with our Flash developers and the QuickTime developers that we can get actually a higher quality out of the QuickTime stuff.

It's of course a cross-platform solution and I really like the track-based architecture. That makes it so easy to be able to put these kinds of materials together and I'll show you some development here shortly. Another great thing is that QuickTime has frame-level synchronization. You can synchronize things down to the frame and usually it's just rock solid.

A long history of CD-ROM and web support supports a single plug-in instead of collection of products. That's very important to us. We really want to keep the support costs low. With all the products that we release, there's always a support cost that's attached to that. We need to be really careful with that.

There are some issues that you should be aware of. Probably the toughest thing for our students is, some students, is the install process. There's just, I can't remember how many there are now. 13, 14 steps. And some of the technophobes out there are scared to death. They don't know what any of these screens mean and stuff. So you just need to be prepared to kind of step them through the process. Of course, you know, those techno guys out there, the techno folks usually have no problem installing QuickTime. They just click through, right?

There's also the NAG screen. Occasionally we'll put things in the QuickTime player and some of the technophobes just don't know what to do once that screen's up there. Do I buy? Do I not? And we kind of need to help step them through the process. Now most of the stuff we do nowadays is through the QuickTime plugin, which that NAG screen only shows once when you make the install. And then it doesn't show again if you're using the plugin. So a lot of the stuff we do, even on CD-ROM, we'll actually just put it in a web environment.

Okay, here's kind of a process that we use to create synchronized lectures. Of referring, well, first we have them create a script. I think this is really important. There's all kinds of noise. We really feel that there's all kinds of noise when we shoot in a live setting.

It may save time, but I think in the long run, if you bring the faculty member into the studio, you get a nice, you get a more clear message. And so we have the professor create a script. Of course, that script goes through a review process. Once the script is finalized, we actually create the slides after the script is done. So it saves us time on that. Once the slides are done, we usually use PowerPoint. That seems to be very popular.

We'll talk more about that here later. After we create the slides and the script, we create a document that has all that information in it and we go into the studio. We shoot the professor. The professor is reading the scripts or if they're off the teleprompter or if they're really good, they just kind of recite it by memory.

After that, we create an interface. We create a caption. The caption is really easy in this kind of workflow because you already have the script, right? Then we add an interface. We sync the slides together, add a caption, add an index. An index basically is the chapter tracks. Prep for deployment and then we deploy it. Now after this we have also an evaluation process. We have student surveys, make sure that the materials that we've created are actually accomplishing the objectives that we've set out. Since this is a development forum, I skipped all that stuff.

Okay, so when we create a script, usually it's done in Microsoft Word, and something very important to the developers is they actually label when the slides are. That's extremely helpful for us. Okay, when we acquire the slides, usually it's through PowerPoint. And there's an interesting issue with PowerPoint.

Most of the professors like to use one slide with multiple bullet points, right? And they use a custom animation to show the points one at a time. Well, we want to be able to export that out into still images. And of course, QuickTime supports all kinds of different image formats. So you just need to export to one of those that fits.

Usually we've found that you need to export those slides on the same machine that was authored. That just usually simplifies if you don't have the fonts. Of course, there's font substitution that comes in. There's cross-platform issues, especially with the latest version of Microsoft Office for OS X. It has all kinds of really cool graphics features. Alpha channels is extremely important to us, and it supports that. And Windows does a great job with that. So usually we like to export on the same machine.

The Macintosh PIC format can also use vector text. But when you save out those slides as Macintosh PIC, you have to make sure that wherever you deploy that particular presentation, they have to have those same fonts. So usually for simplicity, we just export out as PNG. Now, returning back to the issue of how do you capture the slides if you want all the bullet points to be separate? Well, we... We took a look at that, and we decided that we were going to create an Apple script.

So we have an Apple script that you can connect up to Snaps Pro. So basically, you just set Snaps Pro up with the file format that you want to save as and the size and everything, and bring up the presentation and let Apple script go through. Apple script will drive the presentation in full screen, and Snaps Pro will take a picture of every single slide that you've got. We found that to be extremely useful. So at the end of the presentation, I'll show you a link where you can download that and use that if you'd like.

Okay, so after the slides, we capture the video. You do have the option to record in the class, but we found that kind of the noise to learning or noise to content level is pretty high inside, well, in a live setting. Also, there's lighting issues that you really want to bring this person into the studio to get a good quality video clip.

Now, I guess there's also issues on whether you use talking head or whether you skip the talking head and just use audio. For some reasons to use talking head is if the professor is using a lot of body language. You know, nonverbal communication accounts for, like, I guess studies show that 55% of the presentation is dependent on or is impacted by the nonverbal language that's going on in the presentation.

So, some professors... you'll probably want to use video, and other professors, you probably don't want to use video. So, that's kind of a judgment call that you'll need to make. Of course, not using video, you've reduced the size significantly of the presentation. So, there's some things to look at. Of course, you want to use proper lighting. You want to use a close microphone so you can capture the audio nice and clear.

Sometimes we've experimented with capturing straight to a compressed format using... a broadcaster or some other tool. We actually found a way to hack Final Cut Pro to capture in sorts and video. Stick to the standard methods of capturing the tape, dumping that down, and compressing from a high res file. It does a better job. Of course, we do pre-processing. We use squeeze, cleaner, and compressor. It just depends on the project and what resources are available at the time.

After that we create the interface. Of course we use Photoshop. We leverage layers. Very important concept for us. It helps maximize things. Of course there's all kinds of cool non-destructive things that you can do. Effects and things that you can do in Photoshop that we like to leverage. This is just a simple interface that we threw together. We have a portion for the video, we have a portion for the slides, and we just kind of put a skin on it.

Creating the caption. This is, again, very important for education. And why you might want to do that, the government, of course, has come out with Section 508, which are a set of guidelines for all of their products that they need to account for accessibility. Basically, for video, we need to accommodate a few things. For the visually challenged, we need to add some kind of an equivalent, like an audio track.

For the hearing impaired, we need to be able to We need to be able to show captions and provide some kind of a text equivalent, right? And also the W3C has come out with some guidelines as well that we need to account for. So how do you go about doing this inside of QuickTime? Well, because of the track-based architecture, text tracks is one of the track types that you can use. And so we actually do a lot of our captioning just by hand, pulling up QuickTime Player, pulling up Microsoft Word.

And going through and typing those things in. There are some applications out there that are available that can kind of help streamline things. Magpie is a free utility that's out there by WGBH that's built off of Java, so it's a craft platform. And it does a pretty good job. It's actually a terrific application, especially because it's free. It'll allow you to go through and mark times.

And then at the very end, well, as you mark times in the video clip, you can add your text to it. So you can choose the text that needs to go there. And at the very end, you can export that as a QuickTime movie. We'll kind of go through the process of creating some of these things here shortly. But Textation and GoLive and LiveStage all have options as well that allow you to create captions. And we'll go through the process of creating some of those things here shortly.

How we doing? Okay, I'm going to just whiz through some of this stuff here. Here we go, indexing. Indexing is very important. We want to be able to jump through to specific points in a movie. Usually we do that through chapter tracks. You can also create a visual table of contents and there are some facility out there, there is facility out there to do searchable tracks. Okay, here we go. So, I'm going to show you how to create synchronized presentations in all of these different solutions here. QuickTime Player Pro, Smile, Live Stage and Go Live. And, can we go back to, oh this is good.

Hey, guess what? Okay, so let's see. Let's start off by using Smile. No, I take that back. Let's use QuickTime Player Pro. We're going to create that slide show, the Russian slide show in QuickTime Player. Basically what we're going to do, you need to have Pro to do this, is here's the audio track and here are the slides. I'm just going to open up the first five slides or so in QuickTime Player. Here we go.

Okay. Alright, first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to copy this slide to the clipboard. So here we go. Copy. Then I'm going to go to the audio track and I'm going to hold down the shift key. Now this is a great example because there's actually a beep that tells me when the next slide is. Excuse me. So... What I'm going to do is I'm going to play this clip and I'm going to hold down the shift key. What that does is as the movie is playing, it's going to select that portion that I just played. So here we go.

Aha! Okay. So now I've just selected that portion that slides on the clipboard. Now what I'm going to do is come under here and choose Add Scaled. And what that does is that adds that particular slide to that duration in the movie clip. Now we're at the very end of that clip so we don't see it.

That's fine. What I'm going to do now is do Command-B, which will take both selection points and put them right at the point where I just stopped. I'm going to hold down the shift key again.

[Transcript missing]

Okay, right there. And let's go to slide two. We're going to copy this to the clipboard.

And then I'm going to choose Add Scale. OK. Now that just added that slide to the selection that's made available right there. So I'm going to do Command B, and we're going to do this one more time. . Okay, and slide three. Let's find slide three. Copy, add scale. Okay? Pretty straightforward. The only disadvantage of this is if you screw up, you kind of have to do undo and back up a little bit to see what's going on. But here, let me just show you what that looks like now.

[Transcript missing]

A little straightforward. Okay, so basically that's doing kind of a presentation in QuickTime Player Pro. I guess what I could have done is added a caption. We'll have to skip that today. We're kind of running short on time. So let's move to Smile. Let me open up this presentation right here. Here's our Smile file. And can you see that? Is that kind of small? Let me see if I can zoom in real quick.

Okay, let's go through kind of what's going on here. So for Smile, of course, it's based off of XML, so we need to make sure that our tags are all straight and that we've got ending brackets and everything. At the very beginning here, we kind of set up Smile and we set an XML namespace here for what kind of code we're using. QuickTime has all kinds of interesting QuickTime specific tags that you can use.

And you can see some of these right at the very top. We're going to set the autoplay to true. We're going to add a time slider. We're going to, immediate instantiation kind of means, does this movie wait until everything gets loaded before it plays or can it kind of like fast start playing before things are completely loaded.

And we're using a chapter track in here and so there's a chapter track mode that we need to set for all, which means this whole movie clip gets the same chapter track. After that, we have a header here. And in the header. We get to put some annotations.

These actually show up as QuickTime annotations. And there's a whole set of different parameters that you can set there. In the layout area, this is kind of where we set up visually what's going to be happening in this Smile file. And so we set up a root layout. That's the basic dimensions of the whole file. And then inside that root layout, we can put in regions. And these regions are the different containers that we have for the different objects in there. So we have a region for the backdrop. We have a region for the background.

We have a region for the video. We have a region for the slides and also the transcript. After that, this is kind of crazy. This is kind of the solution we came up with for the navigation, the table of contents. We actually set up a region for every single chapter point that's there in the table of contents. Kind of crazy. I think there's been some fixes now with QuickTime text that you can actually just put one line of text in there instead.

But we just set up regions. and each region has Each region has a specific area. Also, right beside the region, there is a little pointer, a little dot that tells you what chapter that you're on. We actually set up a separate region for that. So let's see, how am I going to do this? I guess I'm going to have to do this. Okay, let's scroll down a little bit.

Alright, here's where we start placing things, the actual content in the presentation. So we have the body tag and inside the body tag we have a parallel tag. So in the parallel tag everything gets played at the same time. So we have a background image that needs to be played at the same time. And we actually sent, you notice that there's an end tag here. Can you see that? Here we go. The end tag says, "Hey, stretch this background image to the entire length of the video clip."

And we also set a chapter point. This QT colon chapter, those are actually the chapter tracks that get listed. Right? And we set a duration. These are actually the slides here. So you have all the slides and This is a little confusing. Sorry about that. At the very end here, we have the table of contents. It's actually a text.

In fact, right, let's see, sorry about this. This is actually text data. The QuickTime basically has its own little markup language for text. And that's basically what you're seeing here. We're saying, hey, show this text. It's QT text. Show the font, show the size, bold, width, all that stuff. And at the very end is the content right here, start. That's what actually gets shown in that particular layer. We won't spend too much time on this because you can download it and you can check it out for yourself if you'd like.

I actually wrote this by hand. I just find that just a little bit easier to do. A lot of times, you know with HTML, the editors kind of add extra code and stuff that kind of gets in the way. That's kind of the same thing here. Now Go Live does have a smile editor and actually I like developing in that because kind of the markup changes color and that kind of fun stuff. But I kind of still kind of code by hand. And hopefully this will kind of give you a good idea of what's available inside of QuickTime.

Okay, so moving right along. Let's see, what's next? Let's do href tracks real quick. How much time do we have? 12 minutes. Okay. So here's an href track. This is kind of what we did to set this up. We used Go Live. Go Live actually has a really good QuickTime editor in it.

It's kind of tucked behind. There's not a lot of marketing going on with the QuickTime editor inside of Go Live. But the first thing we do with this is that we set up a web page, right? And this is a framed environment. So we have an area where the video clip gets displayed. And if I open that up, here's the video clip.

And it's basically an embedded QuickTime movie that's there. We have just a blank space here. And then here's where the content is. And what's very important here is you need to know the name of this frame space. Because when the movie is playing, we tell the href track to say, hey, grab this HTML file and put it in this frame. And so we need to know that this frame is called content. So if we come over here, I'm just going to double click on this video clip.

And it opens up the QuickTime editor in here. Now, there's a timeline here at the very top. And we're going to show that. One thing I really like about Go Live is this timeline. It's really nice. Let's see if I can move some things around here. Okay. So this particular movie clip just has an audio track and a video track. And what we want to do is add an href track. So if you go over here to the QuickTime properties area here. And if we come down, here is the href So we're going to drag an href track there.

Let's see if I can, oh well. We need the inspector, so bring the inspector back. I'm going to select, there's actually kind of a track view and then this is the sample view down below. We need to select that sample view and the very beginning here, we need to select that first, let's see if I can find this real quick. Okay.

We need to select the first slide. So here's our slides and what I did earlier is I created an HTML page for every single slide. So this is the first slide that needs to be loaded. So we're going to select that. We're going to select the target, which is, since the page is already open in the background, it puts the frame name, makes it available for me. And I'm going to select auto-load URL. Okay, so we've set up our first frame.

Now what we need to do is, I'm going to choose preview here, and for some reason now, that activates this little transport down here. I'm going to play this clip. So I'm going to go ahead and select the slide. And I'm going to go ahead and select the slide. And I'm going to go ahead and select the slide.

Okay, so I'm going to go ahead and select the slide. And I'm going to go ahead and select the slide. So what I'm going to do is, I'm going to take my slice tool and line it up right there and create a new sample inside this href track. Now, if I select that sample, I can change this to slide two, right?

So now I have slide one at the very beginning, and now at that particular time, it goes to slide two. Now, all I do from this is I just continue on. Well, accounting is-- I think it goes right about there, somewhere in that area. So you just keep doing this till the end of the presentation, right?

All righty? So that's basically how you'd go ahead and put in an href track. Now, you can do something very similar with a text track inside of Go Live. Let's drag a text track here. Oh, and I need to bring this all the way back. And here we have the track representation. And then down below, we have the samples.

And this is where we put the actual text. So what I'm going to do here is-- and again, you can just work linearly. Let's go over these questions. OK, so you can start there and say-- That's what he says. Back it up just a little bit. Try it again.

Questions reflected here in this first... You get the idea and then when you apply that and then you can use the same process here of breaking up those tracks into different points and just kind of go in a linear fashion all the way through the clip and create that text track.

Now one thing that I forgot to do is you can actually go here in the layout area and you can change the dimensions of that. So if you wanted this to be, there we go, and we could just move that down to the bottom. And I guess I should change this text here. If I select this sample here, I can.

Apply it. Okay, now when I save this, and let's go and let's see if this all works. Let's go over these questions. I think I've got some issues with my frames here. The first one was, why is accounting... Well, you see the caption is working and you also see that the HTML pages are flipping, right? Accounting is the language of business because accounting seeks to provide information... Does that give you a good enough idea of what's going on there?

So there's a powerful tool inside. Oh, and there's all kinds of interesting tracks. You can do effects tracks and all kinds of-- chapter tracks is basically the same process of going through linear. Start at the beginning and just go all the way down your movie and add chapter tracks.

And so that's basically using Go Live. We need to jump into Live Stage real quick. Livestage, of course, has some powerful scripting tools in there, but it also has some tools to help you create presentations. Did you know that there's a synchronizer inside of Livestage? Okay, let me show you how that works.

Okay. Let's create a brand new project. We're going to start straight from scratch here. Okay. First thing I'm going to do once this is up is I'm going to do command I, show the movie inspector. I'm just going to set right off the top my dimensions of the movie that I want to create, and I'm going to erase that background.

Then I'm going to save it. This is really important because before this, I actually created a library folder, and inside that library folder, I put all my media that I'm going to use for this particular project. This is really important because I want all my materials in that one folder so that I can transport this. If I'm on different computers and stuff, I want to be able to transport this around.

So you see the movie, there's the background image and the slides are in that area. So I'm going to save that one level up from that library folder. And this is called sample. Okay, now once I save that, if I look at the local library, it's pointing to that library folder that's just been set up. So now I can go ahead and I'm going to drag in my background image.

And I'm going to drag in The movie clip. Okay, I'm going to position that movie clip so it's right on top. "If I move my mouse over the duration, well over the video clip, it's telling me the duration. 27, 22, 221. And I'm going to just, this is kind of just an easy way to make the duration of the background clip the same."

So now, excuse me, you can see that, oh my, what happened there? I must have mistyped something. Okay, there we go. Now we've got the background. The background has the same duration as the video clips. Now we're going to put the slides in. Now to do this, what we need to do is that there's, I guess, a couple different ways you can do this. This is how I like to do it. I select all these slides. Here we go.

It's important that you select every single file. If you were just to grab the folder and drag it over to this area, what it does is it creates a single track for every single one of those images, and we don't want that. So here we go. So if we drag that over here, what it does is it creates a single picture track with all those tracks, with all those pictures lined up. You see how they're all lined up together? Okay. So what we're going to do now is we're going to use the synchronizer to specify the times of all those slides.

So how do we do that? We select the soundtrack down here, come under movie, and choose media synchronizer. Here's the synchronizer. We get to select the source for the audio or video track that we're going to synchronize to. Then down here, we're going to select the track that we're going to use. I forgot to do something very important. Don't follow me.

Follow Michael Schaaf because this is his recommendation. That is to name every single track and then select the time. And item explicitly. This can help you tremendously in your development. So let me just do this real quick. Sorry. Creature of habit here. Okay. So here are my slides.

There we go. So now if I have selected the soundtrack, I go back to the media synchronizer. Now I know for sure that I want to sync to slides and not some other track. We could be syncing the background track for all we know. Okay, so from this point we have the opportunity to click the synchronize button and what we want to do here is as we're listening to this we want to set the out point or the in point depending on where we are. So let's see if we can do this.

We talked in an earlier presentation about how to plan a presentation. I think this goes on for a little bit so I'm going to try to jump a little bit further. We also want to talk about why every good message has to be three elements and then talk about how to implement those three elements in a good presentation. So, what elements... Okay, so right there I'm going to have that slide.

[Transcript missing]

Let's see. Once it's done, you come back here, you'll notice that, well, once you do all of them, you'll notice that the durations of all those have been lined up exactly where you want it to go all the way through. How are we doing? Oh, we've got one minute and 23 seconds. So, one last thing I want to show you and that is the multi-speed control. I'll show you how to set that up. And to do that, I'm just going to pull up another project.

Okay, here's how we set that up. We basically followed the same pattern that we just did with synchronizing the slide. I forgot to mention one other thing, but we'll do that here shortly. So we basically follow that same step. This one has a whole bunch of other stuff in there, but you notice that there's actually three different tracks here at the very bottom. Track one, excuse me, I'm losing my voice.

Track 1 is one speed. Alpha, beta, power. Okay, track 2 is one and a half speed. Power and the relationships. Okay. In our last lesson. Alright, track 3 is two times speed. Okay, now what's going on here? They're actually slower, right? But what happens is that when you add your wired sprites here, Let's pull up our wired sprites real quick.

In the code here for wired sprites, we tell this thing, okay, if it's one speed, well, set the movie rate. Let's see, where is this? There we go. If this thing is, when you click on the one speed button, it plays one speed. When you click on the 1.5, there we go.

It speeds it up to 1.5. So the trick here is that you've got to lower the pitch of the voice so when you play one and a half speed, it brings it up to the same pitch level and plays it in that fashion, right? Understand how that goes? So with 2.5, again, since the pitch was lowered and then you play it two and a half times speed, it actually brings the pitch back up and plays it faster.

See how that works? So basically use Logic or I think there's all kinds of different audio apps out there that will just lower the pitch for you. And so you just want to make sure that the durations are still the same on your audio clips, but they all have different pitches to start out with. And then when you bring them in here, when you create those speed buttons, it brings the pitch back up and just plays it faster. So the real trick here is to get the, you know, get what level do you bring the pitch down.

And we've kind of found that with different people, you kind of have to use different settings. So it's kind of a hit and miss kind of thing. But basically that's it. And let's see, can we go back to slides? I think I got a ton of... I think I've got about 20 more slides, but we'll skip those because we're over time. So, quickly, CD-ROM deployment.

Two kinds. We really prefer progressive. It just seems a lot more simple to do progressive than to, at this point in time, for us. We distribute all our stuff on CD-ROM, even in our distance edge department. We do it all on CD-ROM. That's actually turned out to be a silver lining because of these patent suits that are going on.

We don't have any problems with the lawsuits going on right now because we already were distributing all our materials on CD-ROM. For us, it just seems a little bit easier. Well, we'll leave it at that. I'm over time. So, we actually deploy a lot of stuff on CD-ROM in the web browser.

Just really quick and simple. There's one important thing I'll put on my website that you'll need to know, and that is in Internet Explorer, if you try to develop a CD with Internet Explorer for Windows, it bypasses, well, I guess they have a, a feature inside of IE for Windows that requires the whole thing to download.

The whole movie has to download into the cache before it starts playing. There's a workaround for that. You can use QT source tags and all kinds of interesting stuff. Occasionally we do deploy through HTTP, but a lot of times what we do is we'll make the movies available for the students and the students can download those and burn those to CD.

So here's a summary. QuickTime is an excellent solution for this kind of stuff. There's all kinds of great advantages to do it. And you know the development process isn't that bad. There are different ways to create it. Captioning is a very important feature. Sorry we didn't spend more time on that. Indexing, of course, just adds value to your materials. And time scale modification, I think, can save a lot of time. It's going to be very useful. And here's who you can contact if you have any questions. Just talk to us too, or Amy. And that's it.
