---
Title:  Wireless Directions
Year:   2002
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2002/806/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Good morning. Welcome to Worldwide Developer Conference, day three. Everybody having a good time? Pretty good conference so far? Great. Well, I'm really glad to see this 800-person room is at least half occupied. We were wondering how much interest we'd have in wireless directions this morning, and it looks pretty great. So we have a lot to cover today. I'm going to get right into it.

I'm the first name you see up there, Dave Russell, Director of Product Marketing for Wireless Products at Apple. During this presentation I'm going to talk about wireless directions at a pretty high level, where Apple's going, and actually share some real content with you. Later on in the presentation I'm going to bring up Paul Rekieta, Networking Engineering Manager at Apple. He'll talk about some new features of AirPorT in Jaguar, and then later on in the presentation Tom Weyer from the Worldwide Developer Conference, who's an evangelist for networking products, is going to come up and talk about Bluetooth, new features in Bluetooth as well.

So the agenda today is Apple's strategy for 802.11. Our implementation of that is AirPort, and also Bluetooth. As you know, we released a technology preview a couple of months ago. We're going to release another one later on today. We'll talk more about that later. I want to tell you about where we're going in terms of 802.11, how we're going to evolve AirPort, what the considerations are there. Paul Rekieta is going to talk about new AirPort features in Jaguar, and Tom's going to talk about Bluetooth technology preview, too. A lot of content in that. First thing I want to talk about is technology leadership.

We decided in about the late 1990s to build Ethernet into every Macintosh that we build. It's taken the rest of the computer industry until just recently to build in Ethernet into almost every machine, and you can still find notebooks out there without Ethernet built into it. So we established in the late 90s that Ethernet was going to be our wireless LAN strategy and build it into everything, okay?

We followed that up in 1998 with the introduction of the iMac, ditching legacy I/O and implementing USB. And from then on, every Macintosh had a built-in USB port, at least one. And that became our new technology for wired peripherals and human input devices on the desktop. You know, we think about where would USB be if we hadn't done that?

Probably laying fallow in the industry in a chicken-and-egg situation. Here's this wonderful technology, but nobody wants to implement it. The devices are too expensive because there aren't enough of them and there aren't enough computers to attach them to, etc. We just bagged all that, basically, and just built it into every machine. And today, we really can't imagine what the world would be like without USB peripherals. We intend to do that with every technology that you see on the slides behind me.

We followed up that USB leadership in 1999 when we introduced the iBook and AirPort, wireless networking technology for mobile devices. We built into the machines antennas built into all of our machines, AirPorT software built into every single machine that we ship. And that became our wireless networking strategy. A couple of months ago, we introduced Bluetooth as a technology preview at Macworld Tokyo back in March.

And we intend to do the same thing for Bluetooth, hardware devices as well as software support built into our OS that we've done with every other one of the technologies that you see. Granted, we're still in our infancy stage. Granted, there will be some problems. Granted, we'll probably end up debugging the world's Bluetooth devices out there, just like we ended up doing with USB devices back in 1998. But we think the future is, in terms of wireless peripherals, is Bluetooth. And we're going there.

So what does that mean? We think AirPort is wireless Ethernet, and we think Bluetooth is wireless peripherals. Now, a lot of people think Bluetooth is wireless networking also, and we don't really position it that way. That'll become very clear during this presentation. Let's talk a little bit about why we don't see it that way.

If you look at the slides up above, you look at the speed of 802.11b, which is a specification that we use to build AirPort with. 11 megabit per second maximum theoretical data rate in 802.11b in the AirPort products that we offer today. Bluetooth offers theoretical maximum data rate of 1 megabit per second.

So in terms of scaling, one is really good for networking and one is really good for moving small amounts of data over short distances also. If you look at the coverage radius of the two, maximum data rate of AirPort can be served out to about 150 feet. You know, Bluetooth really stretches itself to provide any kind of data rate out to 30 feet or so. It's really good at much, much shorter ranges than that.

Something that'll be interesting later on in this presentation is the fact that they both operate at the same frequency, 2.4 gigahertz, okay? And also the number of devices that both can support. We support up to 50 users off one single AirPort base station. Bluetooth technology allows seven slave devices to be wirelessly connected to one master device.

The signal power is very different between the two of them and that's why the range varies so much between the two as well. So you look at those considerations and it really tells you that the purpose that we think of 802.11b should be wireless LAN and the purpose that we think, where we want to take our products, of Bluetooth should be wireless peripherals. And that's the direction we'd like to point the developers in as well.

Okay. A question I get asked a lot is do 802.11b and Bluetooth interfere with one another? Well, absolutely. You know? So do garage door openers, so do cordless phones that are on the market because they all operate in the 2.4 gigahertz frequency band. So there is some interference.

But because Bluetooth and AirPort have a different modulation method, those interferences are random and infrequent and basically what happens is packets that are lost in interference, collisions between Bluetooth and 802.11b are dropped temporarily and then sent at the next opportunity when Bluetooth basically hops out of the particular channel that AirPort is communicating in and retransmits. That's kind of a mouthful. An animation would really help here. Maybe I have one. So let me set this slide up real quickly.

The 2.4 gigahertz frequency band is divided up into several channels that AirPort uses. The 2.4 gigahertz frequency band is divided up into several channels that AirPort uses. channels that airport can communicate on individually and bluetooth actually frequency hops in that two point four gigahertz frequency band. Bluetooth actually divides that band up into seventy-nine channels that are one megahertz wide.

And it hops in between randomly, not just in a linear back and forth sequence, but randomly in each one of those subchannels basically, about sixteen hundred times per second. So what does that look like when a packet from a bluetooth telephone is communicating with a notebook, say a power book or an iBook, and that power book or iBook is also communicating on a wireless LAN with airport? Well, this animation should make it clearer than my words can.

So you see packets starting, airport and power book communicating with one another, and the bluetooth phone, let's say it's doing access to a WAN to do email. Packets moving back and forth. Here's a packet now that is colliding. That same packet then is dropped and then picked up and retransmitted at the next opportunity. I'll let this loop for a minute because it's kind of hard to catch the first time.

So yes, you do see some occasional interference. Our own testing indicates that from a user level, you don't really notice a slowdown in throughput when those packets are dropped and then retransmitted. Let's just focus specifically on AirPorT for a little while. What I really want to talk to you about is 802.11 directions, where we're going to take this technology.

You've probably all heard about 802.11b, which is what we build in AirPort. You've also heard about a competing standard that have products on the market today called 802.11a, which seems to be the best thing in the world in the sense that it offers much higher data rate, higher bandwidth, potentially could support more users. I don't think the world's quite that simple, though. Let's look a little bit at the pros and cons of 802.11a and 802.11b.

Granted, a does offer a much higher data rate than b, and that's a good thing. That's a great thing, as a matter of fact. In terms of range, b, at a lower data rate, offers a much greater range than 802.11a can support. And actually, as you look at a plot of a's data rate over distance, it drops up very, very, very, very dramatically at a short distance. So at longer distances, out in the thresholds of where 802.11b can communicate, b actually offers a higher throughput than a does.

In terms of power, because a operates at a higher frequency and a different modulation method, it uses a lot more power than b. This is not a good thing for notebooks. And notebooks is one of the critical applications for wireless networking. Notebooks run on battery power. Trying to give as much battery life into a notebook like a PowerBook or an iBook, something we really pride ourselves on in Apple, is important.

So we're not really interested in things that really wreck our battery life that we've worked so hard for. We've worked so hard in the OS and in the hardware to deliver. In terms of availability, both products are on the market today. Base stations and cards that support a or b are on the market today.

So, there's a competing standard that's coming on the market, probably towards the end of the year, as the IEEE ratifies the specification. And that's 802.11g. If we go through this chart, we can look at some of the defining features of A, B, and G. A, as I said, 11 megabit per second maximum theoretical raw data rate. A serves up at 54 megabits per second. And G, the same 54 megabits per second that A does.

If you look at the coverage, though, it's a fairly sophisticated piece of slideware here. B has a maximum range at its maximum theoretical data rate of 150 feet, whereas A drops off very precipitously at about 38 feet, and 802.11g pulls that range out to about 59 feet. That's kind of a simplistic way of looking at it, just in a linear fashion of how far away can you get from a base station and still get the maximum theoretical data rate of 15 megabits per second.

So that's one of these technologies. Probably more importantly is to think about it in a two-dimensional form, and that is to look at the area coverage in terms of square feet, okay? Pi r squared. So 71,000 square feet for 802.11b, 4,500 square feet for A, 11,000 square feet for G. But in a perfect world, these base stations are providing a spherical coverage, a three-dimensional coverage. So basically... Basically a cubic coverage, if you will. Four-thirds pi r cubed is the formula for looking at that. So what do you get?

You know, 41 million, actually that's a typo, it should be 14 million cubic feet, just a little quick math, 14 million cubic feet of 802.11b, 230,000 roughly cubic feet for A, and over 800,000 cubic feet for 802.11g. So why is that important? Because customers who are trying to deploy base stations want to use as few of those as possible so that they don't have, you know, expense issues, wiring issues to those base stations, etc.

So the ability to deploy fewer base stations is important, and we think G offers higher data rate and the ability to offer or to deploy fewer base stations. We feel that's very important for our customers. Stepping down on the chart, looking at frequency, you can see that both G and B operate in the 2.4 gigahertz spectrum, and A operates at 5 gigahertz.

Fundamentally, therefore, A and B and G will not be compatible with one another. A and G, on the other hand, have the opportunity to be compatible because they operate in the same frequency. And if you look at the modulation method, B uses direct sequence spread spectrum, quite a mouthful, and also at lower data rates, 802.11g operates that same kind of radio as B does, and therefore those two can become compatible. We think that's extremely important.

So how does all this thing plot out? What you see on the slide here is a plot of 802.11b's data rate over distance. And I have three slides showing each one of these technologies. The slides are normalized for the same x-y axis. So here's B trucking along at about 11 megabit per second, getting out to about 50 meters or so, and its data rate steps down to about 5 megabits per second, then down to 2, and then down to 1 at long distances.

So it offers really nice range. The same x-y axis plotted for A looks like this. So you can see that A's maximum data rate drops off very precipitously, and it actually offers fairly short range. Where we think the future is, is this is the plot for G. You see the dotted line towards the left?

That's the end of G. That's when it becomes a B radio and begins to offer the same long range at a lower data rate as B. But it also offers 54 megabits per second at a much greater distance than A does. Here's all three of those plots put together. So the orange is A, products on the market today that offer high bandwidth. And then the yellow, this looks yellow to me, is B, the technology that we have today. And green is 802.11b.

Products that we expect to see on the market towards the end of the year. And that's what Apple thinks is worth waiting for. We think 802.11g preserves the investment in airport base stations today, offers the low power, the high bandwidth, and the long range. So that's where we're going. I don't have any specific products to announce today, but long term, our commitment is to 802.11g and B base stations and B cards will fit into networks that offer 802.11g data rates and range as well. So that's where we're going with airport.

Next, I'd like to bring up Paul Rekieta. He's going to talk about new AirPorT features that you may have already discovered in the Jaguar release that you got earlier in the week. If you haven't had time to look at them, Paul will take you through them. At the very end of this, we'll have a Q&A, and you can ask any questions on any of these technologies as well. So, Paul, I'll leave the stage to you. There you go, your clicker.

Thank you very much. Thanks, Dave. I just wanted to talk a little bit about what we're doing, AirPort and Jaguar. As you know, we've done several hardware and software releases over the past year, and we never rest. We keep going, so there's plenty more to do. First is the AirPort base station.

As you know, the AirPort base station does NAT. NAT's going to be with us for a long time until people move to IPv6. So what's important to us is to make sure that the NAT that's in the base station works as well as it can. And to that end, we're spending a lot of time working on various gateway software to work through the NAT. What customers have been asking for a lot is PPTP and IPsec, and both of those we'll be delivering.

And what that does is allow several popular Windows VPN clients to work through the AirPort base station. As we work on the base station, we always take opportunities to improve features and fix problems that we see. And one of those is kind of an embarrassing problem that we had with port mapping, and so we've got that working right now. I've got Traceroute working through the base station. One of the big advantages of the new software that we're doing will be that it registers with multicast DNS.

And that's what Steve called rendezvous the other day when he put up this slide. I was thinking, what is rendezvous? But I realized that that is multicast DNS. So that, together with zero configuration networking, will allow for simpler access to the base station, allow for our tools to find it more often than it sometimes does today, and maybe opportunities for third-party development management applications to also get in there and discover the base stations.

A big new feature for this release will be PPP dial-in. So what that does is allow you to dial into your own base station, have access to your home network, and access to your ISP through that base station. So that's typically useful for, you know, if you have cable motor or you have DSL, oftentimes you don't have dial-up access.

So if you're out on the road or if you're staying in a hotel, rather than trying to figure out how I can get a free AOL client account long enough to check my mail or get access to Earthlink or something like that, this way you can just dial up your home phone number, dial into your network, and do everything that you want to do.

The other part is disabling the SNMP access. Earlier this year, there was a search advisory that came out that talked about some SNMP weaknesses. We did test the base station against those weaknesses, and we didn't discover any vulnerabilities, but several customers are still concerned about it, so we just have a simple checkbox to just completely disable SNMP on the WAN side.

Finally, DHCP message text. This is something that we support currently today in OS 9, and I hope the OS X networking guys are going to do it for OS X. Basically, what this does is allow you to program a welcome message into the base station. As you acquire a DHCP lease, you'll get a little notification up on your screen saying, Welcome to my base station. Welcome to Starbucks. Welcome to Hilton Hotels or wherever happens to have this base station. This is kind of just some of the high-level things that we're doing at the base station level to just continue to advance that technology.

There's just a couple slides of how we do it. This is showing the checkbox that just controls whether you can access SNP over the WAN port, so it's just a simple checkbox. We're looking at some other things in terms of adding access control lists and different kinds of password mechanisms so that you can conditionally allow some people access, but for now we just decided to do it this way.

Don't want to hear any jokes about whether or not-- how much information we expose over SMP, but if you don't want to see anything, you're just completely turned off. And then this is just kind of the current model for configuring the PPP dial-in. So, again, you just set it up with a username, password, and some information about when you want the base station to answer, and if you want to leave it-- Kick people off sooner rather than later. I just want to make a word about what is on the seed CD that you got. Some of the software is there, and it's kind of in a pre-release state.

This particular feature I don't think works very well. So I would just say that if you were going to install this on your... If you want to install this on your base station, you're not going to get the full things that we talked about today. Do it and play around with it, but just be prepared to step back. In terms of the features that are there today, the software that's on the seed will continue to work, so you can play around with it. Right now, this is just experimental stuff.

The next thing I want to talk about is just kind of what we're doing on the client side. The client side that we have, I think we do a pretty good job of offering easy-to-use features, a lot of power and flexibility for the user, but we get a lot of comments and questions and requests for different things, so what we're trying to do with this Jaguar release is just continue to improve the preferences UI that we have, mainly just to... and other companies have made a significant contribution to the industry. In the last two years, Apple has been the leading provider of wireless computers to consumers, which is a major advantage.

administrators, especially school administrators, don't want that to happen. What we've done is provide an option that's available to system 10 administrators to prevent those IBSSs from being created. Unfortunately, there's nothing we can do at the standard level, at this kind of level. It would be nice in keynotes to be able to say, don't allow any IBSS networks anywhere, but we can't do that. At least at the UI level, at the computer level, at the workstation level, we can stop that. The other part, and again what we say here is multicast DNS, but that's the rendezvous technology. So our airport admin utility will use that to discover and manage base stations.

The setup assistant, we introduced AOL support in the last software release, but it was kind of a two-step process. So you had to go in, set up your base station to use AOL, and then come back to AOL client and do some setup there to actually use AirPort. So what we've done for this release is kind of combine that together so that now the setup assistant will also go out and automatically configure the AOL client for you.

So these are some of the preferences, and again, another comment about the Seed CD, these preferences are all disabled. So you won't see it looking like that. You'll see this panel, but they'll all be disabled. There's nothing wrong with your computer when you see that, it's just that we don't have the feature turned on for this Seed release.

So I want to talk a little bit about how this differs from what we have today. What we have today, I don't know if people really realize it, is kind of we just have this middle option that remembers the most recent networks that you've been a part of.

So what it tends to do is it tends to just work all the time. So if you go home and you join your network, once you've kind of primed the pump, more or less, it just kind of always works. So you go home and join your home network. You go to school and join your school network, and you go to work and join your work network.

We remember those recent networks. Then every time the system starts up, every time it wakes from sleep, it kind of works back through that list and says, oh, am I at home? If I am, I just joined the network. If I'm not at home, then I say, well, is it at the school network? So if it's there, it just joins that school network. So I think that's a really kind of powerful feature, and I think it was a big thing that we did. I can't remember which software release, a couple of releases ago.

But it just mainly means that every time you wake from sleep, every time you start up, things just work, and you just get associated with a network that you think you should be associated with without really having to do anything. So we want to keep that feature, but at the same time, people have, again, made some requests that we change a few things.

One is when we remember those networks, we also remember the WebKey. So people are concerned at schools or, again, in kind of shared computer locations that if you join a network with a WebKey, that computer goes to sleep, somebody else walks up to it, wake it back up, then you're back on that same network. So, again, this is an administrator-level option that just says we're not going to remember the password. So, yeah.

We're trying to actually kind of figure out if we're going to prompt you for those passwords, which we will if we can find the networks. Otherwise, you'll just have to manually reassociate with them. But again, this is kind of a security feature, and so you don't reassociate with networks that you don't want to. There's been a lot of confusion over that behavior, which has kind of always been hidden under the covers, compared to the other option up there, which is to join a specific network.

In the shipping 10.1.4 kind of things we have today, we have this option that lets you join a specific network, but it really only works when you first start off the computer or when you switch computer locations. So the intent there when we first did it was that you would have a location for home and a location for work and a location for school, and each of those would have a network and a password associated with it, and you switch locations and then you would join the right network.

That's just kind of awkward. Nobody really wants to set up a whole bunch of locations, and nobody wants to really switch between locations. So that's when we introduced this other feature. But again, in shared environments or in school environments or lab situations, you want to join a network, and you want to join only that network and not do anything else. So that's kind of what this last option is for. For shared computer environments, it says, "I just want to join the English department network. I just want to join the computer lab network, and I don't want to do anything else."

And finally, then we have these other kind of situations where you're on the road and you want to open up your computer at Starbucks. You want to open up your computer in the hotel lobby. You know, open up your computer out here in this lobby and just get on the network and you don't care what it is. And that's what the top radio button is, which is just join whatever network you can join. And again, these in this release will be kind of also location-based. So you would typically choose one of these options based on what you want to do.

If you want to have, you know, a travel location where you select this best network kind of option, that would provide that opportunity for you. And you'll see this checkbox at the bottom, which is where we disable the ability to create IBSS networks. And again, that's just a local administrator option. It just happens on the local computer. And with that, just a couple more things before I turn it over to Tom.

I think I talked about the seed CDs. Just to kind of reinforce what Dave was saying, that we're continually looking at standards that are coming out. We have representation at the various IEEE committee meetings where we discuss things like B and A and G and the different kind of security standards and different new forms of WEP and new forms of encryption. So we're very active in those groups, and we're not standing on the sidelines waiting for things to happen. We're there participating in those discussions.

And we're also listening to our customers and... providing features that those customers are asking for, specialized features for education, and a few other things that I couldn't talk about here today, but we hope that you'll be pleasantly surprised when the Jaguar CD comes out. So with that, I'll turn it back over to Tom to talk about Bluetooth.

Now you know why I didn't go through college on an athletic scholarship. I'm going to talk for a little while about Bluetooth. Dave's done a pretty good job of already positioning the technology at Apple, and how we view Bluetooth and AirPort as being rather complementary technologies. So let me quickly summarize what is Bluetooth.

Again, you heard Dave talk about it's a short-range cable replacement. We see it as wireless USB. It's, in general, IR done right. You don't have to aim it, you don't have to point it, and you get a pretty good distance from it, around 30 feet. It's based on a publicly available specification controlled by the Bluetooth SIG, and it's based on RF.

It's a very low-power wireless technology that operates in the same band, as AirPort in the ISM band. And it's based on this concept of profiles. I'm going to go into detail on some of those profiles in the next couple of slides. The profiles describe how devices interoperate between one another. It was originally developed by the cell phone companies as a replacement, again, for infrared on their phones and other devices.

So let me talk about the Bluetooth Preview 1 that we shipped at Macworld Tokyo. The first release provided support for a number of different profiles. The first profile was dial-up networking. What dial-up networking allows you to do is to use your cell phone as a wireless modem connected to your computer, so that you can use your computer to dial up to the internet anywhere you are. This will give you network coverage anywhere that you have cell coverage. And again, this is based on the idea of Bluetooth being a functional replacement for the infrared connection you previously had between your portable and your phone.

The other profile that I'm going to talk a little bit about is the serial profile. So we use this serial port profile to support things like POM synchronization from a handheld to a computer. The last profile that we supported in Preview 1 is OBEX, or Object Push. That allows me to send a vCard from one computer or phone to another device. And it also allows me to send small files, and I'll show you a demo of sending a file between two computers using this. But again, the idea is to move a very small file, a vCard, you know, a business card has very little data in it.

So, in the first implementation, we tested this with a number of devices. We tested this with some PDAs and some phones. Specifically, we tested it with the Palm 500 series, with the SD Bluetooth card, which I'm going to demo a little later, with the Sony Clie, which has a memory stick adapter.

The memory stick adapter isn't available in this country; it is available in Japan. And that was the demo that we did in Tokyo. It also is compatible with a number of third-party devices, which actually attach to some of these PDAs. And there's devices to adapt your legacy PDA and give it Bluetooth access. And that's things like the Big Red -- I'm sorry, the Red M sled. And also, the same company, Red M, makes a device for the hand spring.

We've tested this with a variety of phones. We're finding more and more phones compatible every day. We've got a very active users group out there on our boards who are testing a variety of phones and telling us that more and more things work every day. The ones that we tested internally were a variety of Ericsson phones -- I'm not going to read the list; you can see it -- a Nokia, and also a Docomo, NTT Docomo phone, I'm Mofone from Japan.

So let me talk a little bit about the demos that I'm going to do, and we'll all cross our fingers here because any demo that's live requires crossed fingers. I'm going to show synchronization from a POM to a laptop without wires over Bluetooth. This is using the serial port profile that I described earlier. I'm then going to send a vCard from my POM to my laptop, and that will be using the object push profile. And what you'll see is when I send it, the business card will actually open up on the laptop.

The next set of demos I'm going to do are from computer to computer. So I'm going to send from one Mac to another Mac an image using iPhoto. So I'll drag an image from iPhoto into Bluetooth file exchange, and I'll use that to send it to another PowerBook and then open it on that.

Finally, the last demo I'm going to do will be showing off the Object Push profile by sending from my PowerBook a vCard directly to my phone to add to the address book on the phone, because we all know that typing names and addresses on a number pad is not the ideal user experience. So with that, I'm going to try and bring up my demos here.

What I've got on the left is Palm Desktop running on top of Jaguar with a new build of the Bluetooth support that will be shipping later this afternoon. This is Preview 2. Preview 2 will install on the build of Jaguar you've got. That's the same build I'm running here. The current Preview will not install on Jaguar. So what I've got here is a Palm 5 series with a Bluetooth SD card.

I'm going to go to my calendar, and I've added to my calendar a very important event, which is a meeting that I'm going to try and make right after this, which is the Bluetooth in-depth session. What I'm going to do here is I'm going to trigger a synchronization just like I would normally, but this time what I'm going to do is I'm going to do it over Bluetooth.

So I've already set this up to synchronize over Bluetooth to the Mac that you see on the other screen. And you'll see on this screen there's no event at 10 o'clock, and you saw that there was one here. You'll see that the POM will go out, look across the network, look for the other Mac, it will find the other Mac, There's actually a bug in some of the Jaguar support, but let's try that again.

So again, it'll go across. It'll find the Palm desktop running on the other computer. It'll launch the synchronized application. It'll determine what files need to be synchronized, again, just like you had it directly connected to it. Run through the conduits that are installed, close the application,

[Transcript missing]

Let's go.

The next thing I'm going to do, as I said, is I'm going to send a vCard from my palm to my Mac. So this is the equivalent of, you know, somebody walks up and they've got a business card, they want to send it to you, and you want it on your PowerBook, in your address book, because we all know that the address book is the place that we go for contacts at Mac OS X. So I'm going to go to my address book, and I'm going to beam a business card.

I'm going to beam this business card to the other Mac here on the screen. So again, I just choose Send Address, and it gives me a choice of various ways I can send. I'm obviously going to choose Bluetooth for this demo. and it's now searching across the network of Bluetooth devices that are up here and it will then give me a choice of the various devices that it found. There's actually somebody else up here too, because there's now four of them.

and it'll get human-readable names for each of the devices. I could have previously paired with one of the computers so I didn't have to go through this whole search process. But since I know that FSA is the computer I want to send it to, I'm going to say OK.

And what will happen is it will send it to this computer, and the way that I've got it configured, it will ask me what I want to do with it. So let's take a look at that. So I'm going to send that.

[Transcript missing]

and you'll see it opens up into address book and now I have a new business card which is bogus bogus. So that's all, again, all configurable. Let me show you a little bit of the user interface here.

So here's where I assign that behavior. Do I open it automatically with an application? Do I ask the user whether they want to confirm it or not? So when I receive files, what do you want to do? Do you want to automatically accept it? Or do you want to prompt each time?

I ask usually to make sure that I accept it so that I know that somebody's not sending me some huge file taking up disk space. You also have controls based on the type of data. So if I receive PIM data, vCards, vCalc, things of that nature, I can have various options for it.

Again, I can save it automatically, I can launch the helper, which is what I did, or I can ask the user what application do they want to launch. Again, the same thing for things which aren't PIM data. And of course I can also choose where the data is actually stored. So with that, I'm going to try my next demo, Tempting Fate once again.

And I'm going to I'm going to open iPhoto here on one of my PowerBooks, and I'm going to send the files from this PowerBook, a picture from this PowerBook, to the other PowerBook. And again, we're going to see how when I drag something to Bluetooth file exchange, the other computer wakes up, notices there's a document, asks me what I want to do, says, do you want to accept it? I'll accept it. Excuse me. And then it will automatically launch the helper app that I've chosen, in this case, Preview, to open. So let me go pick a photo here.

These are some photos I just shot diving. I'm going to grab one of these and I will drag it onto this helper app that installs with Bluetooth. So, I will pick the other computer that I want to send it to, and I'll tell it to send. You'll see then on the other screen, the alert come up saying that you're receiving a document.

Do you want to accept it? Sure. And very quickly, I'll move that 300K file over to the other computer. And again, since you saw the Open Automatically dialog, you'll see Preview Launches. And the document will come to the foreground and display on the other computer. And there it is.

Okay, the last demo I'm going to do is I'm going to actually push an object from my computer to my phone. Again, we talked about this earlier, the user interface The user interface on this phone is not exactly lend itself to... Yeah, ignore the picture. Does not exactly lend itself towards editing pictures and images real well. So, let's go ahead and... Set that aside. We're going to open... I think we're on the wrong computer. Okay. We'll go ahead and open the address book.

And I've got a V-card here that I'm going to send, but this time I'm going to choose my phone. And I'll send it. And on the other screen, I've now received a business card on the phone. So I'll walk over here, and I will look for that contact.

[Transcript missing]

We'll try one more time this way. Can we switch to the other screen? We'll try it from the other computer. This machine isn't actually discoverable.

This is why you pair ahead of time, so you don't actually have to search for devices. Okay. So we'll pick my phone again. Try sending it. It's asking me if I want to accept this card, and I will say yes. And it will say it's been added. And I will... Go into my phone book. I will look for that business card. And I will find it. And I'll see there that all the information was sent, the name of the person, and the various phone numbers and email addresses I had in the vCard. All right.

Can we get the slides back up? OK. So let me talk a little bit more about what's in Preview 2 and how that's different from what you guys have seen already. So in Preview 2, we've added a number of new functions. We've added the ability to create outgoing serial ports automatically. We've also provided the ability to pair to things other than phones. There are a variety of devices that you might want to pair to your computer that aren't phones.

You saw my PDA, and there are a variety of other things out there coming on the market that make a lot of sense to connect. We've also, with the release of Preview 2 later this week, released a developer SDK. And inside the developer SDK, you'll find sample code to help you develop your application, documentation and headers, as well as some sample applications. These helper apps will help you in developing your Bluetooth applications.

You'll also find some tools to help you manage the serial port and Bluetooth ports on the device. For more information on Preview 2 and the developer opportunities around that, I recommend that you stay here for session 807, where my colleague Mike Larson is going to go through in detail the functions of Preview 2 and how you can extend the Bluetooth solution to your device.

We've also provided the ability to pair to things other than phones. You'll also find sample code to help you in developing your application, documentation and headers, as well as some sample applications. You'll also find sample code to help you in developing your application, documentation and headers, as well as some sample applications.

A couple of additional links for more information. Of course, there's the canonical source for information on Bluetooth, which is the Bluetooth SIG, and that's at www.bluetooth.org. There's a number of really good books out there, but the best one that I've seen is one entitled Bluetooth Connect Without Cables. The information on that's up here as well.

In terms of 802.11 or AirPorT, the canonical reference site for that, for 802.11, is the Wi-Fi site, which is the Wireless Ethernet Compatibility Alliance. And of course, the IEEE site, if you want to read all the gory details on the specification and any of the various flavors of 802.11 which are being worked on.

So much of this is probably pretty obvious to you. There are a number of related sessions that are probably of interest to you. We've already talked about the Bluetooth session, which is immediately following this in the same room. There's also an advanced Mac OS X networking session, which is on Thursday at 9 in the morning. There's the rendezvous session, which is later in the afternoon on Thursday. And there also was, earlier in the week, an overview session on Mac OS X networking.

So if you watch the video streams after the show is over or end up with the DVDs, then you'll probably want to take a look at that for more information. And with that, if you have additional questions, feel free to contact me. My contact information is up on the slide. And, of course, there's a mailing list that we've set up for developers who are working on... supporting Bluetooth applications or Bluetooth hardware. And you'll see the URL for that on the board as well.

I've referenced a couple of times during my session to a board at Apple where a number of people are talking about Bluetooth, sharing their experiences, what they've tested, what works, what doesn't work, how to get various things to work. You might want to take a look at that as well. And that's the Bluetooth link that's up here.
