---
Title:  Publishing with the iBookstore
Year:   2012
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2012/501/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Good morning! I hope you all are having a good day so far. Welcome to Publishing with the iBookstore. My name is Kristi Gillis. I've worked in publishing for more than 10 years, and at Apple, my team manages worldwide publisher support. It is absolutely a pleasure to be with you guys this morning to talk about books.

Publishing with the iBookstore is the first of five presentations about books at this year's WWDC. In the next hour, we're going to focus on four key areas of the book business. First, iBooks and what's technically possible with books. Second, we're going to talk about how you get started with the iBookstore. Third, we'll talk about delivering books to the bookstore.

And what you can expect from the book approval process. And finally, last but not least, we're going to talk about how you market your books and reach your readers. It's my hope that at the end of this hour, you're going to leave inspired by the possibilities of books and determined to become a bookseller with us.

Because publishing is big business. In 2010, publishers based in the United States grossed $27.9 billion. Now, it used to be that to grab a piece of this pie and to participate in the publishing space required a tremendous amount of fiscal investment. You needed to have a printing press to print your books. And when your books were ready to go, you needed to have some tractor trailers to go and to pick them all up. Then, they needed to go to your physical distribution center, so you needed to have a warehouse to hold all of your books.

Then, when a customer placed an order, you would need to have someone to pick, pack, and ship those books. They need to get on another truck and make their way across the country. Sometimes they'd even need to ride on a boat. And then they find their way onto the shelves in a bookshop, where hopefully someone found them, fell in love with them, and took them home. Because if not, they could begin making their way back to you as inventory returns.

They get back onto another truck, and they come back to your distribution center. This is sort of the old way. I'm very happy to say that times have changed. Now to publish all you need is a great idea and a Mac. The iBookstore ecosystem begins with iBooks. iBooks is Apple's revolutionary app for readers.

So it enables readers to look at books that contain video, audio, and even interactivity. Readers are able to actually work within the books themselves. iBooks also allows readers to design their own libraries of content. And you can see here, here's my shelf. This is, I've named it Kristi's shelf.

Pretty creative name. But if, like me, maybe you want to put your cookbooks on one shelf and your novels on another, you're able to do that. You're able to build collections of books. And then as a reader, when you need more content, you simply click through the app directly to the iBooks store where you can browse our holdings and make additional purchases. Now yesterday in the keynote address, Tim shared with us that there are 400 million App Store customers.

These are App Store customers with credit cards on file. And what I'm delighted to say this morning is that these are also iBooks store customers. These are readers who are here, they're in the store, and they're waiting for your books. So let's get into it. So let's get into how we reach them. And to get us started, we want to start with iBooks and talk about the books themselves.

So to lead us in that discussion, I'd like to introduce Al Canestraro, head of iBooks Engineering, to tell us about books. Hi, everybody. I'm the engineering manager for iBooks, the application. We've been working really hard for the last two years to make the most fully featured book reader on the planet.

And what I want to show you today is a little bit of a story. What I want to show you today are some of the ways that you can enhance your book to make them stand out on the iBooks store and make a great way for you to reach your customers. So I want to show you three different book types today. The first book type is called a flowing book. And it's probably the one you're most familiar with. It contains mostly text but can be enhanced in ways that were impossible with print.

The second book type is a fixed layout book. And those are perfect if you're starting with a layout or you're starting with an aspect ratio that you need to respect. And it's backed by WebKit. So you can do things like animations and interaction and JavaScript, which of course you can't do with print.

And the last book type I'm going to show you today is called a multi-touch book. And these are created with the amazing iBooks Author app on the Mac. And they're the fastest way and the easiest way for you to go from a concept in your head to a finished book to something you're selling on the store. So let's take a look right now. So this is my bookshelf. Not quite as extravagant as Kristi's. We're going to first look at The Hobbit by J.R.R. Tolkien.

It's a flowing book. When I tap on it, it opens up to the last page I was reading, or in this case, it's my first time opening it, so it's the first page of text. If I tap the page, I can show and hide the controls. If I tap on the edges of the pages, I can actually turn the page, or we have a beautiful page curl that tracks my finger if I want to drag.

Now, a flowing book is really about making the reading experience great for the customer. So we've added a lot of customization. If I tap on the A's in the top right corner, you'll see a set of customization options for the user. I can make the text bigger. or smaller. I can even change the fonts. If I tap on the fonts button, here's an example of Cerevec, which is a really slick modern font that we ship with the app.

I'll show you a page with text. Or if you prefer a more classic look, Back to the fonts menu, I can tap on Athalos, which is a really classic book reading font. We can also change the theme. So let's say you're reading in bed. And you want to get rid of the backlight. You want the text to stand out. If I tap on night mode... The page goes black and just the text stands out. Or sepia if you like a warmer background color.

We can even go full screen. If you're the kind of reader that wants to get rid of all the distractions on the page, let's go into full screen mode and you'll see the book trim goes away, and there's nothing on the page but the text itself. So of course, just like print books, let's go to the next page, we can include images in a book.

But what we can do here that you can't do in print, if I double tap, I can actually pop that image out of the book, zoom in and look at all the detail, scroll around. If I double tap, it goes back. And then I can actually I can add bookmarks by tapping on the bookmark button in the top right corner.

So let's look at the table of contents. So if I go, if I tap on the table of contents button in the top left, it takes me to a page that has the entire structure of the book under contents. It also lets me view my bookmarks and notes. Let's go take a look at a bookmark that I've taken previously.

So this takes us to a page that has embedded audio in it. This is where you can take books beyond print. In this case, the publisher actually chose to include clips of J.R.R. Tolkien himself singing the songs from The Hobbit. So let's hit play and hear how it sounds.

Chip the glasses and crack the blades, blunt the knives and bend the forks. That's what Bill Burbaggins hates, smash the bottles and burn the corks. That's pretty cool. If you're a Hobbit fan, you know that the book is filled with songs, and now you can actually understand how he meant them to sound.

I'm not going to demo much more on the flowing book, but I want to tell you that there's a lot more available. So VoiceOver, for example, iBooks is fully accessible, just like the rest of the iPad. Visually impaired users can have their book read to them by the iPad, but it relies on you as a content producer to make sure that you're doing things like adding alt tags to your images or closed captioning to your videos.

And a couple weeks ago we announced something great. In the last few months we've been working on adding EPUB3 support, and we're the first reader to announce EPUB3 support, support for the new standard inside of iBooks. Thanks. So along with this comes a number of new features as well. One of them is inline footnotes.

So if you want to add a footnote to your text and not take people out of their reading context, you can do that. And you get this little pop over that comes up and shows you the, the footnote that you want to, to point out. Or physical page numbers.

So let's say I'm in class and the teacher has assigned me The Hobbit, and she says turn to page 55. Well, it doesn't matter what font size or font I'm reading at, I can still get to page 55 by tapping on the search button and typing 55. And we've also added the ability to have online video and audio. So if you want to host additional pieces of content on the Internet, you can still make those available inside the book itself. So that, that is a flowing book. The next type of book I want to show you is called a fixed layout book.

So let's go back to the library and take a look at that now. So fixed layout books are perfect when you want to start with an aspect ratio or a particular layout. This is perfect for things like children's books or cookbooks or picture books. I'm going to tap on the second book called Ellie's Lost and Found Sounds.

So as it opens up, you'll see some controls at the top, but what's more interesting is if you look at the page, there's actually animations happening here. Like I said, this is completely backed by WebKit, so anything you can do with CSS animations, JavaScript, gestures and interactivity is all available to you inside of a picture book.

This text is even selectable. So in this case, the publisher included fonts with their book and shipped them. If I double tap on the word "followed," you'll see it's actually live text. Now there's several elements on this page that are interactive as well. So you'll see Ellie on the left here is kind of growing and shrinking, and there's a little button that says tap to hear Ellie. So let's tap her.

It's kind of a sigh or a groan or something. On the right page there's a few other interactive elements, so let's tap on those. And they each make sounds. There's even a bee that I can drag, and as I drag it, it makes a sound, and I can drop it off anywhere I want.

So cute stuff. Now there's another feature in Read Aloud Books, sorry, in fixed layout books called Read Aloud, that we introduced actually right here last year at WWDC. And that allows you to include a narrated voice along with the book that reads the words on the page to the reader.

If I tap on the page to bring up the controls, you'll see an audio button in the top right. If I tap on that, we have some options. There's a big start reading button there. When I tap that, notice that each of the words are going to be lit up on the page as it's spoken. One day, Ellie followed a sound. We can scrub to another page, and the book will actually continue reading. She discovered that sounds can be like keyholes to other worlds.

So this is a fixed layout book. There's one other thing I want to point out about this book in particular, is that the author that created this book actually started by building apps. And what they found is that all of the features that they were looking for in interactivity inside an app was available to them inside of a book.

And they were having a little bit of trouble getting noticed in the app store. But as soon as they made a book that stands out as much as this one, they've become very successful with it. So back to our library. There's one last book type that I'd like to show you, and that's a multi-touch book.

Now, we launched these in January, along with the amazing iBooks Author app that allows you to create a book from scratch and publish it straight to the store. We focus on textbooks and education. But what we've found over the last few months is that people have created some amazing things that went beyond our expectations. This last book I'm going to show you is "American Grown" by none other than Michelle Obama. When I tap it, it opens up.

And it goes straight into a beautiful intro movie. Now, when I swipe left and right in a multi-touch book, I'm actually navigating each of the chapters. or down at the bottom I can swipe to get through each of the individual pages in a chapter. If I pinch on any page, I can zoom it in to full screen.

And you get these beautiful layouts. One of the other really cool features in these is if you want to highlight text, I can actually just use my finger as a highlight. No tools. I just press down on any piece of text. Oops. Press down on any piece of text and start highlighting. If I then tap that highlight, I can change the color or add a note. This book is cool.

Now, what makes multi-touch books really amazing are the widgets that you can embed. On the right here, we have an example of an image gallery. Now, if you've used iBooks Author before, you'll have noticed that it's extremely easy to create these things. You just drag your images in, and this piece of content is created for you. So if I pinch to zoom in to the image gallery, I get a full-screen image as I swipe with the captions and the thumbnails down at the bottom. As I swipe through each image, I can see it in full screen.

And when I pinch to zoom back out, the last image I was looking at is now shown in the book itself. Now, that's just the beginning. I'm going to show you some of the things that they've done with this book that are pretty amazing. I'm going to go to some bookmarks that I've made.

So this is a page that's a gallery of some of the widgets that they've included in this book. We're going to first look at time lapse. There should be no surprise that we, of course, allow you to include audio and video in a multi-touch book. Here's a time lapse of the White House garden.

Pinch to zoom back out. If I go to the previous page, there's a couple more. This one's an HTML, interactive HTML widget. And here's a dial that gives me some ideas about how to save money and cook my own food. Here's one. Have a plan. Plan my meals for the week before I head to the grocery store. I actually do that.

That's a good one. It saves me from spending money at fast food. So let's close this one. I want to show you one last widget here that actually blew me away. I never even considered that this was possible in a book. But we'll tap on the Twitter feed.

And here's a live Twitter feed right inside the book. So that is a multi-touch book. Those are the three different types of books available to you in iBooks. Think about which one is appropriate for you. But what I want to encourage you to do is create books, sell them in the iBookstore, and extend your reach. Show the world that the next great story is interactive. Thank you.

Thank you, Al. So now that you've had the opportunity to see a little bit about what's possible with iBooks and with the books themselves, let's delve into distribution and get back to those 400 million readers and talk about how we're going to connect with them. The iBookstore exists on the iPod Touch, the iPhone, the iPad, and also within the iTunes desktop client. So regardless of your reader's browsing preference, they're able to peruse the store and find the content that they want.

I've spent a lot of time working with publishers, and I know that they face distribution challenges every single day. My team's job, and honestly, my job here today and at the conference, is to make sure that I'm alleviating those challenges so that you can bring your books to market quickly and efficiently with no pain at all.

So, we really want to focus on four key areas of the distribution process this morning: getting started, the book submission and approval process, book submission best practices, I mean, we want to make sure that you have some key takeaways from this session to guide you through the book business, and finally, marketing your books.

And I'd like to start talking about distribution with the story that is one of my favorite stories of my time at the iBookstore. And this is a story about the government of New South Wales and Australia. And a particular distribution challenge that they faced. They needed to provide educational materials to farmers located in remote areas of the outback. Now, some of these farmers live hundreds of miles from the nearest physical bookstore or from a library. So, that team really faced a difficult challenge. How could they get this information to those who needed it?

They decided that digital books provided the medium that they needed to reach the farmers. And then, so they created these fantastic books that look really beautiful. And then, they leveraged the power of the iBookstor to actually get the content to those who needed it. And ultimately, their distribution strategy didn't just stop with Australia. They began selling their content into other markets throughout the world, including the United States, so that farmers worldwide now have access to this content. And they were able to do that because the iBookstor is a global marketplace. There are 32 iBooksstores open worldwide, including Australia.

So, whether, like the team in New South Wales, you have a specific challenge that you need to face where you need to reach a remote corner of a country, or maybe your novel is really fantastic and you want to make sure that readers in Spain are able to read and enjoy it, the iBookstor has a solution for you. So, how do you get started? Let's talk about that. That seems important. Like, what's the first step? First, sign up for the store.

Then write and create your content. Now, it may seem counterintuitive that I'm telling you, don't start with book creation. Start by signing up for the store. But I have a very specific reason to ask you to do this. And that's because, as a publisher with the iBookstore, you gain access to book creation resources that Apple doesn't make available anywhere else.

So within iTunes Connect, I think many of you probably know iTunes Connect from your developer work. There also is a version of iTunes Connect for booksellers. And that's where we include a lot of fantastic information. And I want to focus on three key resources this morning. The first is our iBookstore Asset Guide.

I think of this guide as the blueprint to great book design. This is where we include everything we know about building beautiful books for iBooks. So maybe you want to design a great flowing book, like The Hobbit that you saw earlier. And you want to include some audio or some video. The specifications for doing that are included in this guide.

Maybe you really want to create a children's book. And you want to design something like Ellie. You want to go the path of fixed layout. Again, the Asset Guide is your source for the specs that you need. We also include information on some things about the way the storefront works. For example, you've probably seen book samples in the iBookstore. We tell you how we create those in the iBookstore Asset Guide. It's a fantastic guide. Definitely, you need to download it and take a look at it.

The second resource are samples. We give away two EPUB samples in iTunes Connect. And we also give away a JavaScript library that's specially designed for iBooks. Now, you saw some flowing books. You saw fixed layout. Know that we have a sample of both. So if, like me, you learn by doing, make sure that you download those samples. Open them up. Look at the code. Immerse yourself in the best practices for book design.

And finally, last but certainly not least, I want to introduce you to BookProofer. BookProofer is a Mac app that was designed by Al's team, so designed by our iBooks engineering team, especially for our book partners. And what it does is it helps you proof your EPUBs and essentially test on devices as you're coding them. And I want to take you through a little bit of how that looks.

So here's Ellie, and you can see here I have Ellie on BookProofer on my Mac, and I'm ready to test, and my iPad is tethered to my Mac. Maybe I would also want to test later on my phone, tether the phone to the device. So I place my EPUB of Ellie into BookProofer.

What iBooks will do is it'll create a proof of the book on my bookshelf. And you can see here there's a banner going across the upper right-hand corner of the cover to tell me that this is the proof of my book. So to open the proof, you simply click into the book and open it like any other book. And then you'll see your book render within iBooks. So what's great is as you're tweaking your HTML, you're changing up your CSS, you're able to see real-time what effect those changes are having on your book. So certainly, certainly take advantage of BookProofer.

So to sort of wrap up the getting started process, now we've talked about some of the key resources you need. I just want to touch briefly on what you need to go through our signup flow and to get started. First thing to say is signup is free. You start with a one-year initial term, and we have some options for auto-renewal thereafter. You do need an iTunes Store account or Apple ID to get started, and as developers, I want to make sure that you guys know that this needs to be a unique ID.

It can't be the same as what you use today in the App Store. And last, you need a U.S. tax ID. This is what we do to verify that you are who you say you are as you go through our application flow. And that's getting started. It's really that simple.

So now that you have an agreement, you're starting to design your content, I want to talk about the book submission and approval process. We're going to spend a lot of time talking about this because it's absolutely critical for our book partners. I think that when you get into the delivery process for books and you start focusing on submitting your book, it's easy to get lost in the details. And what I mean by that is you're working with XML. You're thinking about things like image dimensions and sizes and specifications.

But what I really want to say this morning to you guys is at the end of the day, your job when delivering a book is to build a really compelling product page. You want to tell your readers what's special about that book that you design so that they click through and buy it. So to talk about this a little bit more, I wanted to show you guys the product page for American Grown, which Al demoed earlier.

Now, there are two things that Random House has done here that I really want to call to your attention. The first is the book description. You have about 2,000 characters for your description with the iBookstore. Don't simply write, "This is my great book." I mean, I think all of us think our books are great, right? Tell me what's really special about the book. Use those characters.

Build out that real estate on the page so that readers are drawn in and know what to expect when they buy your book. If you look at the leading sentence here, Random House leads off by telling us that this book is about our children's health. Now, that sounds really important to me. It draws me in. I want to know more. I want to explore further.

And they've also shown me what's special about the book with screenshots. Screenshots are a relatively new feature of the iBookstore. They launched in January of this year, and I know you guys know them from the App Store, so you're already a little bit ahead here. But, you know, if your book has video, it has audio, it has interactivity, show the readers what they can expect to find. And then that way, they're enticed to buy, they may even skip the sample process and go directly to that buy button. Make sure that you're really focused on your product page.

So you may be thinking, well, that's great, Kristi, but how do I actually do that? So let's talk about the actual technical pieces of this. Starting with metadata. I sometimes feel like metadata is one of the less glamorous aspects of delivering content. Maybe no one gets that excited about it, but I'm here to tell you that it's a big foundation for having a fantastic-looking product page. And actually, metadata errors are the number one source of delivery issues that I see in publisher-supported Apple.

So make sure that you don't get caught by any of those pitfalls. And so let's start out by talking about using proper casing. It's a bookstore. You want to make sure that you're using great grammar. If your book's in German, capitalize your words the way that you should do in German. If it's in English, follow good rules for English.

choose an appropriate subject or store genre. So if you've written a really creepy, gory, really scary horror novel, don't put it in the kids' section of the store. Because one, as a parent, I'm probably not that excited about my child being frightened by your creation. And two, as a reader of horror, I really wanted to be scared tonight, and I can't find your book because I'm not looking in the kids' section for Bram Stoker's Dracula or for your version of Dracula. So help us merchandise your book. Tell us where it fits in the store, and we're going to show you how to do that.

Identify the language of your book. If I want to read your book in Spanish, I need to know that it's in Spanish. If I want to read in French, I need to know that it's in French. It's that simple. Write a comprehensive description for your book. We've talked a little bit about this with American Grown. Definitely tell us what's there and what makes the book special.

Include target audience data. So what we mean here is that we want you to tell us the age group that's appropriate for the content. So there is a big difference between Ellie, who you saw earlier, a children's picture book, and Twilight, which is a young adult novel about teen vampires, and I think everyone's pretty familiar with that. You know, make sure that as we're merchandising, we know what kind of book you've sent us.

Provide series detail. If you're writing books in a series, make sure that I know where to start, that I know the order of the series. I would have been pretty disappointed if I had started with Sookie Stockhouse book number four, because a lot of surprises would have been ruined for me. Make sure that you're telling us about your series information. And finally, proofread everything before you send it to us. Make sure that that data is flawless, because you want to be beautifully represented in the store. And that's metadata.

So let's talk about images, marketing image. This is the front cover image of your book, and it's required for delivery to the store. So you have to send us one of these. Now, there are some technical specifications for this, specific file types and sizes that you need to adhere to.

But what I want to make sure that you're thinking about is having a really attention-grabbing, beautiful cover for your book. When I'm going through the search results in the iBookstore as a reader, and I'm thinking about what I want to read next, grab me with your art. Make me want to go into that product page and see what your book has to offer.

And again, screenshots. You need to take advantage of screenshots. These are fantastic for highly illustrated text. You can give us up to five per book, and you can order them any way you'd like. So you can tell us the story of the book and bring your reader in. Draw them in by telling them the story with screenshots.

And finally, you need to give us a book. It would be a little bit hard for someone to read your book if we didn't have it. We work with two file formats in the iBook store, and I'll show you both of those earlier today. First, we have multi-touch books, and these are books created with iBooks Author.

Second, we have EPUB, including EPUB 3. Now, as you're designing your books, you're going to be using those creation tools that we talked about earlier, but you need to bring a strong editorial eye to your content. I mean, what kind of book are you writing? If you're writing a novel, maybe an EPUB flowing book is perfect for you.

But if you're creating a highly interactive textbook, chances are you need the widgets offered by iBooks Author, and you'll want to use that to create your book. Now, we believe that book creation and design is such a deep topic that we've dedicated four additional sessions at this year's conference to it.

So we'll talk a little bit about those at the end of the session, but I just want to mention, now, I mean, this is not all that you're going to get in the world of book creation. So once you've got everything together, you've built your package, please test.

You guys are developers. I know you know how to test things before you deliver them to us, but we wanted to focus a little bit on some of the best practices we can recommend for testing books before you deliver them to the store. So first, test on devices.

You want to make sure, you know, take a walk in that reader's shoes. Make sure the book functions as intended. Make sure that you're looking at it from both the portrait orientation and also the landscape orientation, so that as your reader, I have a great experience regardless of how I like to use my device. Use BookProofer to test your EPUBs, and also look at iBooks Author's preview feature for multi-touch books. Take advantage of the tools we give you so that testing is easy.

If you need to make a change to a file after you've delivered it to us, please do regression testing. I mean, I know you guys do this every day with your apps. It's really no different from books. If you make a change in part A of your book, make certain that you didn't break something further down the line.

And finally, think about navigation for books. There is a table of contents feature in iBooks. You need to make sure that your book is constructed so that as a reader, I'm able to easily navigate through your content. Also, make sure your links work. Don't take me to a dead end. It's really that simple. You always, always need to develop with your reader in mind. So today, we wanted to give you a few of our recommendations for how you can do that.

Beginning with accessibility. Both the iOS and iBooks have a ton of features to enable really accessible content on Apple devices. You should make sure that anyone who wants to read your book has the ability to do that. The iBooks or asset guide talks a lot about EPUB and how you can make sure your EPUBs are accessible.

iBooks author comes with built-in options to allow you to create accessible features in a multi-touch book. Take advantage of this. File size. So your books can be up to two gigabytes in size. But just because you can do it doesn't necessarily mean that you should. As you're adding video, audio, sort of heavy elements, really take a strong editorial approach.

You don't want to be a blind eye to whether they really make the book. Because you don't know where someone's going to be downloading that book. They may not have a fantastic connection. Really think about file size and think about your reader as you build your book. Fingers.

So it may seem strange to see fingers up here. But this goes back to interactive books. Now, if I'm a child who just got Ellie, you know, my motor skills may not be as developed as ours. So think about that as you're designing hot zones for your books.

Length. Length should work. That's really -- that's it. Speed. The iBooks or asset guide offers a lot of guidance about how you can have a book that performs really efficiently and quickly on the device. Make sure that you're taking advantage of all of those places to improve book performance. It can be as simple as substituting a JPEG for a PNG. It can be really that easy. Text.

They're books. We get a lot of complaints when books have misspelled words. Or bad grammar. Or maybe the text is overlapping on pages. Your QC process and your development process needs to be really focused on the text. And finally, zoom. This is about image quality. Our devices are capable of rendering art beautifully. Make sure that when someone's pinching and zooming, as Al showed you, that the image doesn't become blurry or pixelated. Make sure that your reader is having a really great experience with images.

So once you deliver your book to us, you've gone through all of these steps, you've thought carefully about your reader, your book will go through quality control at Apple. Every book goes through review. And it's a pretty simple process. We put the book on an iPad. We test it. If you have widgets, we're going to test them. We're going to make sure that they work. If we find anything wrong, we'll issue a ticket to you. You can get tickets by email. You can also access them in iTunes Connect, as you see here in step two.

There's a ticket history module that will list out all of this information. If something goes wrong, all you need to do to get yourself back in a review queue is to re-deliver the book. And again, make sure you've tested the book again end-to-end before you re-submit to us. When it comes back in, we're going to put it on an iPad again. We'll check it out. If everything's okay, it goes right out to the store for sale, as you see pictured here in step four.

Now, thinking about the book approval process, it seems only fitting that we should share with you some of the top reasons why we see books rejected. We really wanted to make sure that we gave you guys some great best practices. One, omitting the custom preview from multi-touch books and read-allowed books.

Some of our more complex formats require our book partners to provide the sample that the customer receives from the store. Two, making sure that you're looking at the requirements in the asset guide and that if you need to deliver one of these books, make sure you're providing a sample.

Book image is larger than 2 million pixels. So Al touched a little bit about WebKit and how WebKit interacts with iBooks. To make sure that your book functions correctly, we need to make sure that the interior images of the book are smaller than 2 million pixels. If you send in images larger than that, we'll actually reject them at the time of delivery.

and complete table of contents. Again, book navigation is key. If there are 50 chapters in the book, make sure that the table of contents shows me 50 chapters. Don't just give me one or two. As a reader, I'm going to be pretty dissatisfied with that experience. Incorrect subject or classification schema. Well, you'll see a little bit more about this in a few moments. But again, help us merchandise your book. If it's a cookbook, tell us it's a cookbook. If it's a sci-fi novel, tell us it's a sci-fi novel.

Poor image quality. We've touched about this a little bit. Make sure your images look great. Misusing Apple trademarks. I mean, this is pretty simple. Just make sure you're aware of the rules for using any Apple trademarked names. Compound authors and metadata. This is a really common one. So if Al and I were to write a book together, the author wouldn't be Kristi and Al smushed together in one field in the metadata.

I should get my own billing, and Al should get his own. You want to make sure that you tell us who contributed to that work clearly. Asset mismatch. This is pretty simple as well. Make sure that the jacket that you give us, the marketing image you give us, matches the book file itself.

False advertising. Don't promise the reader something they're not going to get. They get upset by that, and it results in customer complaints and sometimes refunds. So you want to make certain that you give them exactly what you've promised. And finally, incorrect language and metadata. We've talked a lot about language, but the iBookstore is global. We need to know what language that book is prepared in. So this is a lot to take in, and what we wanted to do this morning is show you just how to put it into practice.

So to do that, I'd like to introduce Ryan Lynch, our global operations manager for the iBookstore, and he's going to take us through delivering a book. Thank you, Kristi. So I'm going to talk about delivering and managing your books in the iBookstore with our two tools, iTunes Producer, an OS X app for managing delivery, and then iTunes Connect, which I think most of you are already familiar with for managing your content after you've delivered it to us. So first, iTunes Producer. So I've already loaded it up here on my Mac.

And you'll notice here that I've got four main options for creating my content. The first is opening a package. So I'd do that. I'd open a book that I've already created or already delivered so that I can update it and re-deliver it to the store. The second is I can create a new package or a new book from scratch. So I can do that either one at a time with the new book or, on the other side, new from a file.

So iTunes Producer gives you the ability to deliver 10, 20, 50 books at the same time if you want via a spreadsheet. And that is available in the File menu of iTunes Producer. I'm not going to walk you through that right now, but if you do choose this path, be sure that you fill it out completely and exactly as it is demoed in the sample document.

The last option is looking up metadata. So if you've already delivered a book to the bookstore, you can use your Apple ID, which is the identifier of the book that we assign, your vendor ID or ISBN. You put it in here, it'll pull down a metadata that we actually have on the server. You can make updates and then re-deliver that to us. For the purposes of this demo, I'm going to open a package that I've already created.

So here we are. You'll notice that it's divided into three main sections. The first is the book metadata. The second is the assets or the EPUB and the files and that kind of thing. And the third is the validation and delivery step. So we're going to start with the book. So I just want to point out a couple things.

Most of this is fairly self-explanatory. But here, the publisher name, the publisher is the seller that we actually show in the bookstore itself. So we don't put imprint in the store. If you want your name to be E.O. Wilson, you want your name to be Ryan Lynch Books, Inc., make sure you put that there and that's what the customer will see in the store itself.

As Kristi said, series name is quite important. That actually helps us understand where to market your book and how to market your book in the store. So if it is part of a series, please provide that to us. And finally on this, I want to touch on the description. So Kristi said make a good description. Well, that's really quite important, but here you can use things like italics, bold. It doesn't take HTML. So put in as much as you can and make it as nice. It's a standard text editor.

So let's move on to the next tab here, categories. These are the subject categories that Kristi touched on. I need to add one to my book, and so I have an option of one of three subject category systems. These are ones that are used in the book industry by standard. So BISAC is for North America, BIC is for UK and Australia, and CLEEL is for France. They're all the same, essentially. Pick the one that you're most familiar with. So I'm going to choose BISAC, and my book is about art, and it's tattooing.

It's not vampires or something crazy like that like Kristi was talking about earlier. You'll notice that I have this primary checkbox marked here. That's important to check for one genre. That's going to be the primary category that we apply to your book, and your book will appear under that category in the store. You're welcome to provide as many as you'd like, but only one primary per category system.

So let's move on to the third tab, authors. I've already put in two authors here, but you can add as many as you'd like. These are roles like editor, illustrator, author, contributor, et cetera. You'll notice that I only have one selected as primary, so only one will appear in the store as the author of the book. If I want to have more than one author as primary, I would add another author.

So I'm going to add myself, because I did a lot on this book. So I put in my first and last name, and then we have this thing called sort name. And sort name provides us the information to be able to order the book in the bookstore and also on the user's bookshelf when they decide to order by author. So this is generally last name comma first name. And I'm a primary author. It's as easy as that.

So let's move on to the fourth tab, target audience. So I've already added some criteria to the book. I have interest age and years. It's 13 and up. It's meant for adults, very straightforward. But again, this really helps us to market and merchandise your book. So if you have a title that's targeted at young adults or juvenile fiction, which is the K12 set, you want to make sure that we have the age information that's appropriate for your book. Next, let's move on to related products.

This is interesting for you if you have a print version of your book, or if you have other books in a series. You provide us those ISBNs here, and the users can search for the ISBN in the store. It also works for the ISBN that you provide for your book itself. So if they go into a physical store, they see a book, they get the ISBN, the title, whatever, they can come back to the iBookstore, search for it, and find your book. So this is a good thing to do to help promote your title.

And lastly with the metadata, let's look at rights and pricing. You may be familiar with this in the land of apps, but we do things a little differently here. We actually ask that you provide pricing for your book per country. So you have to add each country individually to the title. I've already added two, but I want to show you something that makes it a little bit easier to manage that. And that's called Add Territory Group. It's this button right at the bottom of my country lists.

If I were to click on that, it provides a list of territory groups, and I can add a new one. I commonly sell my books in Canada, France, and, oh, let's say, Czech Republic. So those are the normal book countries in which I sell. So I'm going to save this.

and it adds it to my list. So if I choose it, it will automatically apply those countries to my book to make it nice convenience for you when you're adding new countries. I don't want to go through adding pricing for all these countries right now, so I'm going to remove them for the sake of time.

So that's basically all you need to do for metadata side. Let's look at assets, the second tab at the top. I've already added an EPUB file here, so I don't need to add another one. But note that we also on the right have the publication preview, which Kristi touched on earlier. We automatically create previews for books for EPUBs.

If it's a text-based EPUB or a flowing, we take 5% of the total word count and make a preview for you. If it's a fixed layout, we take 5% of the total page count and provide a preview for you as well. That may not represent your book in the way you'd like to represent it for your customer. For example, in shorter books, the copyright page in front matter has a lot of words on it, those two pieces. So your preview may actually end up being just the copyright page and the first page of text. It's not very helpful for your customers.

So you really want to use this as an opportunity to market your book for your customers and create something that's going to show off your book in the best possible way. So let's move on to the second part of assets, cover art. Kristi's already touched on this. It's 1,400 pixels and the smallest side is what we require. Just make sure it's eye-catching and grabbing. And finally, screenshots. You can provide up to five.

You can also use the iPad resolution. You're welcome to shave off the 20-pixel status bar at the top should you desire, which I have done for all of these images. It looks a little bit jazzier in the store, so I recommend it. We also take the new iPad resolution, so it's 40 pixels for the status bar there.

Now let's move on to delivery and validation. And when you click on that tab, it actually validates all of the metadata and everything that you've added to your book. You notice that I have one error. I forgot to provide a language. If I double-click on that, it takes me to the box where that error is and allows me to enter in what I'm missing. For language, I can just type it in. It's a book in English.

I head over to delivery again, and it says it validates correctly. I've done my job. So I can click on the deliver button, and away it goes. We don't want to wait for that, so I'm going to move on to show you what it looks like in iTunes Connect.

So here again, you're probably very familiar with iTunes Connect. It's the same as apps, but a little bit different. You still come here for your sales and trends reporting. You come here for your financial sales data and all of that. But we've changed a few things for books. So to show you that, let me go into the manage your book section on the right. And I've expired.

So let me log back in here. Go back to the "Manage Your Book" section. You notice that my book is already here. This recent activity, again, just like apps, is the most recently delivered or anything that we've touched recently. So I'm going to click on Life on Earth.

You notice here that it shows the status, that it's not on two stores. And if I want more details on that, I click on that, and it shows that those two countries that I had selected, Australia and United States, it's not for sale in. If I were to click on See Details, it pops up the reasoning at the bottom. I have to go sign my contract, apparently.

Now, we recommend that you keep coming here and checking up on the status of your book. It provides the most up-to-date information of what's happening through the process. And also, if there's tickets or any issues that we find, we flag them here for you. So finally, as you notice on the right-hand side, I can view more details or even edit rights and pricing. So if I want to add any more countries, I can come into iTunes Connect. You can also do that in iTunes Producer and re-deliver. Either way is absolutely fine.

So we want to encourage you to sell in as many markets as possible where you actually have rights for your titles. We have 32 markets around the world. Use every single one of them. Even if you sell one more copy of your book, you make a little bit extra money and get a little bit more notoriety for your next title.

And be sure that you create a really good description, a grabbing and captivating sample, a great cover, and interesting screenshots to maximize your sales as much as possible. Thank you. Thank you, Ryan. So, so far we've talked about what's possible with books, and we've even delivered a book to the store. So to tie it all together, we wanted to close by talking to you a little bit about how you can grow your business once you've begun delivering books.

So the first thing to say is market your books. Don't take the philosophy, if you build it, they will come. You need to be out there telling people about your book. And in iTunes Connect, we give you a marketing and affiliate kit to help you begin that process. So first off, become an affiliate. You know, I'm your fan. I come to your site.

You drive me to the iBookstore so that I can make a purchase. And essentially, because I came in through your site, you earn a commission on that sale. So. Become an affiliate. And if you're interested in the affiliates program, there's another session about that here at the conference to tell you more.

Link to the iBookstore. You know, I'm your fan, I'm really excited about buying your book, but don't make me work for it. Don't make me come and search the store to find it. Take me to your book. Link directly to your book in the store. You can even take advantage of our widget builder so that you can design a really beautiful link for your book. And again, the instructions on how to do this, the link to widget builder is included in that marketing and affiliates kit.

Publicize your book with redemption codes. Now, you guys are familiar with this on the iBookstore side, but the iBookstore also offers redemption codes for publishers. So you're able to give away up to 50 copies of your book to reviewers, to people who are influential, who are going to be able to help market your book. Definitely take advantage of this feature.

Generate pre-orders. Now this is different than the app store. You're able to place your books on sale up to one year in advance of their publication date. You're able to begin building buzz for your book, getting the excitement going. And actually, this is a great way to help your books chart because all of that sale, all of that sales volume that builds up before the on-sale date, posts on the on-sale date. So you should absolutely take advantage of pre-orders.

And of course, go global. I've talked about it. Ryan's talked about it. You know, don't make assumptions about your readers. Don't assume that because I live in Norway, I don't want to read a book that's written in Spanish. If you have the rights to sell into a market, you absolutely should be selling in that market.

So go global. So what have we talked about this morning? I know we're coming to the end of the full hour. So just as a quick recap, sign up for the free free free free free first then create. Remember that you want to take advantage of those book creation resources that are available to you in iTunes Connect. iBooks supports flowing books, fixed layout books, multi-touch books. You want to make sure that you've done your research and figured out which one is the best fit for you editorially.

Then, so you've chosen the book type that best fits your story. You're using Apple tools to build your books. You want to keep thinking about that reader. Just keep them in the front of your mind. Take a walk in their shoes at every step along the way. Go global, I think that's enough said, and market your books.

So I'd like to leave you today with a comment from Stephen King. Now, Stephen King has sold more than 350 million copies of his books worldwide. So he's arguably one of the most successful authors of our time. And King writes, books are a uniquely portable magic. Now, I've loved books since I was a very little girl, so I definitely agree with him.

But you guys are also well acquainted with magic. You create it and you bring it to the App Store each and every day. So what our team would like to say to you is we invite you to bring your creativity and your insights to the iBookstore as well so that you can become a bookseller with us.

So to get you started on your journey, we've included links to many of the resources that we've discussed today, and you'll be able to access these after the conference. And again, remember what I said, this is just the first of five sessions about books. The next one comes up in about 15 minutes, Building Books with iBooks Author.

So if you want to learn more about book instruction, make sure to take advantage of these sessions. And also, keep an eye out for this affiliate session to learn more about how you can earn a commission on sales. You guys have been fantastic. Thank you so much for your time, and I hope that you'll have a great rest of the week.
