---
Title:  Doing Business on Mac OS X: The TBWA Media Arts Lab
Year:   2008
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2008/544/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Thanks everybody for coming. This is going to be a, oh there I am too, more of a cursory overview, sort of an introduction into our little Apple playground. Eric Ediger, technology supervisor of the Media Arts Lab, TBWA. We're an all-Apple, all-the-time advertising agency and Apple is our client. So we'll talk a little bit about some of the work that we've done. To start off with the introduction, to kind of put it in perspective, advertising is kind of like the music industry.

It's owned by several large conglomerates, most of which you may or may not have heard of. At the top is Omnicom. And Omnicom is sort of this big, one of the big six holding companies, one of the, I think the largest holding company in the world for advertising. They're into all kinds of weird and strange things like public relations, advertising, marketing, all that kind of stuff.

If you've read a magazine or watched TV for 15 minutes at any one time, you've probably seen something that Omnicom has been involved in. They also own many advertising networks, influential networks, including BBDO, DDB, and of course TBWA. And TBWA is a network, it's basically a global network of creative agencies. It's one of the most renowned agencies in the world, one of the most decorated. In We got Agency Network of the Year from Adweek Magazine.

And if you're an enthusiast or if you know anything about it, then you've probably heard it one time or another, TBWA Chai Day. The TBWA Chai Day and Apple relationship goes back about 25 years, all the way back to the 1984 ad and some other ads. So we've been around for that long.

So we'll talk a little bit about that as well. If you've been around for any length of time, you've seen some of this advertising. We've been involved in it all, including the famous, now infamous 1984 ad. So just to kind of give you an idea of where we're at.

Now, TBWA is slowly shifting the paradigm of how agencies and brands communicate with audiences. They're using something called media arts. And in 2006, they created something called the Media Arts Lab. And the Media Arts Lab basically was set up to house and explore new, creative, and innovative media. And it was a really, really, really, really, really, creative technologies, new Apple technologies.

And we're kind of a petri dish of experimentation. We've got just about everything that Apple has released commercially. We take it out of the box. We think of ways to integrate it into our business. So we try to be fully integrated with Apple products and services, hence our mailbox.

So, to kind of give you an idea, you're probably asking yourself, "Okay, two things. Number one, what is Media Arts, and what is the Bear logo?" And so, like Apple, we're very California-centric. We did a little agency video that I'm going to show right now, and you're going to be introduced to a gentleman by the name of Lee Clough. Lee Clough is the godfather of advertising. He's essentially the Steve Jobs of advertising.

He was there since the beginning of the 1984 ad, the Taco Bell dog, the Energizer bunny, pedigree campaign. He's been there to oversee, basically, some really great advertising. So, a little bit about that and the Bear. Keep in mind, as you watch this, we are an advertising agency. We're a little bit eccentric and creative.

So you're from California, right? So you understand this California thing. It's always been a place where people kind of think creatively, and this idea of media arts, I mean, this is the right place for that kind of thinking to go on, don't you think? Yeah. I mean, you probably had something to do with it.

I mean, you're the bear, right?

[Transcript missing]

There's this misunderstanding that media arts is like all about new media, but it's really not. Everything is media. We love television, we love making a film to go to Sundance, but then if you come to visit the brand on the web, that might be a different kind of experience, you know, when you go on the web.

The thing about all media arts is there's all this media, but then it now is in the hands of the artist to make sure that it all has to be artistically done, because people are very discriminating. And you have to understand that everybody now is an audience. They aren't just, you know, kind of these slugs sitting on a couch having to watch three television channels. They have a total array of media at their disposal. And they're an audience waiting to either reject you or applaud if you do something smart or entertaining or witty or funny.

"The key to Apple is to kind of think in kind of a total media mindset. Apple's always been brilliant at packaging. When you open an Apple product, it's media, it's communicating something, it makes you feel something. I mean, do you get kind of emotional when you open an iPod box?" Everybody says you're here after everybody goes home. You're kind of a hard-working bear. ♪ Mr. Davis lives in a big house ♪ ♪ In a town called L.A. ♪ Hey, you two, shut up. Just wanna have fun. Just try to have fun.

What Media Arts is? You can explain this to me later if you'd like. So what we're hoping to take away today is sort of a broad brush overview of all the integration that we use, Apple technologies, everything from address book to XServe, all kinds of technologies from Apple TV to XServe Raid and everything in between including iPhones and MacBook Airs and all that kind of thing.

What we're going to skip today, hopefully you didn't come in here for any kind of service oriented architecture, sub-enterprise resource management or anything like that. I actually, that's not a web picture. I actually put that together on a dry erase marker, dry erase board about a year ago trying to figure out how do we align ourselves using Apple technology with the business vision and all that kind of stuff and realize that it's not really necessary.

The Apple, the technology allows us to deploy systems, to beta test and to do all the things that we need to do without all this IT news speak. So we'll cover kind of the basics. Kind of the four areas, well actually I want to talk about this too. That's kind of an interesting philosophy that Apple's taken toward the enterprise environment so we'll talk about our experience with this particular philosophy.

communication, productivity, of course creativity. We are an advertising agency. And then how do we administer all of this stuff? How do we wrap it up and keep it working? And then we'll have a little Q&A afterwards. You can ask me all kinds of things. So pens and paper handy as we go through the first one, which is communication. Now a conversation about communication in Apple obviously has to start with the iPhone.

And there's been a lot of interesting announcements. But if you look back a year and you remember all of the headlines that were coming out, everybody's sort of telling companies to stay away from the iPhone. It's not enterprise ready. It's not ready for the workplace, blah, blah, blah, all this kind of stuff.

Well, we embraced it day one. In fact, it was a mandate that the executives made it very clear that if the iPhone didn't work on day one, that I would be looking for work on day two. So we made sure to have that. We made sure to have that working.

And we did that with a lot of involvement from our infrastructure. We had immediate corporate IT support. We had it hooked up to email. We used IMAP so that we can sync between workstations. Obviously, the announcements this week, this takes on a whole new meaning with sync, push, push calendaring, address server, all this kind of stuff.

So we also had Wi-Fi access in the building immediately. We began forwarding our extensions to the iPhone because there's no reason to carry around two phones when you've got an iPhone that does all this amazing stuff. We've now moved into web app development and, of course, application development. We were syncing with all of the Apple apps, iCal and Adverse Book, and we'll talk a little bit more about that later, too. But the interesting thing happened when we actually sat down and we figured out ways to integrate the iPhone more deeply into our business.

And at TBWA Media Arts Lab and TBWA in general, we have access to a lot of web content-based information services for HR and IT. And now using the Cisco VPN clients on the new iPhone software package, we can access things like an employee manager, a static asset management database, and even, I don't know if you can see it, the Novell.

[Transcript missing]

So we have this sort of, this big comprehensive set of tools available to us. So the notion of no IT departments required, that might sound a little extreme, but you can do whatever is required of you as an IT administrator with the iPhone from the comfort of your own hammock.

So, giving another nod to some of our communication tools, some of the obvious. There's iWeb, there's Mail, there's iChat, Safari, and then some not-so-obvious ways to communicate: .Mac, which is now MobileMe, the Apple TV, iTunes, and a Mac Mini there. You'll be seeing a lot of the Mac Mini.

[Transcript missing]

But again, we'll move on and we'll talk about a Mac Mini and iChat server. I love the Mac Mini because it's an affordable piece of equipment that will run OS X server that you can beta test small groups, deploy software, and if something breaks or if something starts burning, you're not going to ruin or worry about damaging a piece of real hardware.

It's great. You can have multiple ones set up, and we've got a few. So you'll see the Mac Mini a couple of times. And when we use OS X services like iChat server, we can create an internal directory that's secure, and with some of the features like auto buddy ad, when new people are entered into the directory, they're automatically populated to everybody's buddy list so that you have immediate access to everybody in the directory. Of course, server to server federation means that if you're using another XMPP compliant server or Google or something like that, Google Teams and Enterprise, that you can also federate and access, your users can access and chat with people on the Google Teams and Enterprises as well.

or any other XMPP compliant server. So that's communication, we move on to productivity now. And the productivity part of this is basically good communication with good tools. And the good tools are somewhat obvious. Everybody, we know Mail, we know iCal, and some of the ones listed there. And some not so obvious ones, again, the Apple TV, the Mac Mini directory, app utility, not to be confused with directory utility, and iTunes. And so to give a nod to the workhorse as the foundation, of course, Mail, it's kind of hard to remember what was life like before email. We use IMAP, we sync between workstations, webmail.

We also set up as our default RSS reader. So Mail becomes, again, it's a one-stop shop for any of the aggregate news updates, any of the web publishing that we do, mail contents to this page. Address book, we tie that into our LDAP system so that we have access to our worldwide contacts.

iCal, of course, has ushered in a whole new era of collaboration. And this is between teams, this is executives and assistants. Now scheduling meetings is not an oxymoron anymore. You can really schedule knowing who's available, what's available. And with this directory application utility, it's not, I haven't really heard it talked about a lot, but it's really neat because it offers resource planning.

You can have a map of where people are, you can see what's available, who's available. You can do everything from conference rooms to conference phones. We'll talk a little bit more about that in administration. But most of it's based on open source coding, and so it syncs really well.

And of course, when I say sync now, I mean push, because I don't know if there's a push logo, but it syncs really well with that. It syncs really well with all of the Apple hardware, everything from the Big Iron, the XServe RAIDs, all the way down to the iPhone.

So to give another nod to some of our workhorses, we use iTunes Keynote and Aperture to great length. And iTunes is one of those not so obvious productivity tools. But it really has saved us a lot of time and money. We don't often have a lot of time to get songs together for commercials. Literally, sometimes it boils down to one day to get a song together for a commercial. And iTunes allows us to do that very quickly.

Part of the way it does that, of course, is we can find music from almost any artist, and we can own it seconds later. It's become far easier to find it on iTunes and pay the buck to download it than it is to track down the CD, rip the CD, if you can find it, and get the right tune. The artists that Indie Spotlights allows us to find new artists and new material, a lot of the artists that we find for our advertisements, they don't have a record contract when we find them.

Of course, that changes dramatically once they're used in a commercial. And then we can find artists that match a specific genre. So instead of having to go to a music search warehouse and pay all that money to search music over time, we can do that. We can scour through thousands and thousands of songs to find the one that sort of expresses Apple's vision. And you probably recognize some of these here. Some of these. Well, I could hum them, but I don't know if it'd be the same. Let's try one more click.

That's a little bit about iTunes. That's how we've integrated it into our workflow, something that's not one of those obvious productivity tools. The next one is Keynote, and Keynote has become sort of the The empty bucket where we throw all of our ideas, and it doesn't matter what the end result is. It could be print, it could be a presentation, it could be a commercial.

All of the ideas start in Keynote. And it's simply replaced PowerPoint-- it actually did that a while ago-- as the de facto presentation tool. It's sort of clean, tasteful-looking presentations, hopefully like this one. It's versatile. You can export to a number of different formats, Swift files, QuickTime, PDF, and you can also-- it's got great iLife integration. So you can pull music, video, pictures from iPhoto. So Keynote's there every step of the way.

The other sort of unsung hero is Aperture. And Aperture has been a real lifesaver. It's, again, it's one of those, "What was life like before Aperture?" Well, as one of our senior designers says, it's been a life-saving addition to our process. And what life was like before Aperture during our photo shoots, basically, when we do a silhouette photo shoot, a lot of people think that that's CGI.

And there is some CGI involved in, you know, creating the mask and the silhouette at the end of the commercial. But before that, we actually shoot live people dancing. We turn on the music, we audition dancers, they go dance, we take pictures. And we take up to 30,000 photos per silhouette shoot. And each one of those used to be printed out on an 8 1/2 by 11 piece of paper. So we would, you know, scour the floor with 30,000 silhouette shoots. And art directors would come around and mark off the ones that they wanted.

To find the final eight that are eventually used in a silhouette campaign. So now, selects are made during the shoot, and as the process goes on, selects are even made faster, sort of on the fly, as it were. And a process that used to take two to three weeks now takes a couple of days. And the results, again, some of the work that we've done, everybody probably recognizes, it's hard to get away from it now, but this, all of these silhouette ads are a product of using Aperture to get all of those great shots.

Now the Apple TV. Again, something that was created for the house, something that was envisioned as a centerpiece of your multimedia center. And we opened up the box and we said, okay, how can we implement this? What would save us time, energy, money? What would make our lives easier? Well, what we found was is that it doesn't require any IT help. So your assistants, your low-level people, your non-IT people can set this up without any help. It's got a gorgeous interface. It doesn't conflict or interfere with the meeting content.

There's one-click formatting from either iTunes or QuickTime. And what we did is we used the TV functionality for TV shows to organize all our content. So if you can see it up there. So we have shows, season number, episode ID, episode number. That's pretty fine-grained control over how you organize your content.

So instead of burning DVDs, in which case you would burn a DVD and then, oh, crap, now I've got to reorder the content. So you have to reorder it, and then you've got to burn it again. Or you can just go on the fly and give it a different name, give it a different ID number, reorganize it. And, of course, it's high-definition ready. You don't have to mess with the settings. It just works with any kind of, let's see, what have we got? We've got 60-inch plasmas.

We've got little tiny screens, and it works with everything. So we found that to be really intuitive. And also it allows us to hold on to a complete digital archive of what we've presented. So what we presented last week, the week before, the month before, assuming you have the room on it, you can always see what was presented before. So we've got one of these in every major conference room. And when we go to Cupertino and we present to the decision makers, we use an Apple TV, and that's how we display all of our stuff.

So now we can't live without it, actually. So that's the Apple TV. And there goes productivity. So now we get to creativity. We're an advertising agency, and we make stuff. That's essentially our purpose there. And we take the same kind of philosophy as the Apple engineers, where we go from mind to concept, handheld concept, very fast. The idea is that we want to find out right away if something works or if something doesn't work. So we're set up to throw a lot of ideas against the wall and see what sticks. And Final Cut is really where the magic happens.

And yes, we use Adobe CS3. We use Adobe for our print ads. We use it for mechanicals. The Adobe CS3 suite is definitely something that we use. But Final Cut is where we can really quickly test things. We can do things in-house. We can edit it in-house. And we can get stuff, again, from mind to concept very quickly. And I've got a video here. It's another little quick video about that. So that's a little, just a sort of a insight to how we shoot stuff and how we demo stuff. And we really do shoot right there in our kitchen, depending on the day.

We then, Then we have our editors, we edit in-house, we do a, again, it's getting that mind to concept fast. It's kind of a, Apple allows us to create sort of a culture of creativity, where we can really come up with a lot of ideas and there's a lot of cross pollination between advertising, the creative people and even the administrative people, even the IT people, we get a chance to create a little bit and to get into the mix a little bit.

So that's a little bit about the creative and again, if you've watched television for more than 15 minutes, you'll probably recognize one or more of these. And this is what Final Cut, Apple technology makes this possible. It allows us the flexibility, the freedom to really come up with a lot of these ideas and throw them up against the wall there.

So now to the administration part. This is where it gets really interesting, I promise. Behind all the administration, behind all of this, of course, is OS X Server. And all of the peripheral applications, software, hardware, everything that we use, it all ties in very nicely. And so we'll kind of go piece by piece through it.

We'll start off with the iChat, iCal, and Time Machine, which is kind of more the workhorse day-to-day. The really unique thing this time with Leopard is Apple took a different approach, and it allowed you to set up an advanced configuration, a workgroup configuration, and a standard configuration. And if you do advanced configuration, you can't do standard.

And if you do workgroup, you better be careful if you do advanced, because you're not sure what might happen if you push the wrong button. But the standard and workgroup server preferences are very simple. It's very straightforward. You create the accounts in your directory, and you turn the services on, and you turn the services on, or off.

As we'll see, the big buttons, not a lot of mucking around going on here. And that's kind of a change from the server client dynamic that we're all used to as administrators. And to talk about iChat Server, again, we use a Mac Mini. We're 100 people. We don't need the investment in the big iron, and that's another thing to take away here, is that you can invest in some.

Without breaking the bank, you can set the stuff up. And some of the preferences, again, a big on and off button, and it's huge. It's like a big light switch. And there's not a lot of mucking around. Again, automatically make all users buddies. Okay, we like that. Okay. Enable server-to-server communication. That's great, too, if you want to federate with other XMPP servers we talked about earlier, like Google, Enterprise Teams, that sort of thing. Of course, if you want to log and archive all chats, that's great.

The unique thing, though, or the unique or interesting thing, is that the server admin, the typical server admin that's been there all the time, it's not much different. There's not a lot of fine-grained stuff to mess around with. You've got the same host certificates, authentication. You can choose what servers you want to federate with and which ones you don't. But the XMPP federation allows you, again, if you've got groups or if you've got servers running on a different platform, as long as it's XMPP compliant and not behind a firewall, Apple says you should be able to federate with it.

Talking about the server admin preferences, again, this is a unique position that Apple takes. In the standard and workgroup mode, the server preferences allow you to auto-buddy add. We saw that earlier. If you use the advanced configuration, that button is not there. How do you do it? Well, you need to know this little command line. And that then populates everybody's buddy list with the new members.

So where did I find that? I found that in the discussions.apple.com. So we'll talk a little bit about that, too. The discussion groups have been sort of an integral part of our beta testing, of our implementation. We go there often. We post. We reply. So that's a good place to go.

I-Cal Server. Again, Mac Mini. We can put this on an X-Serve. Again, we're not that big yet. We're still beta testing a few things. We've got some various pods on it. The server preferences, again, big light switch. On. Not much else to think about. Limit calendar event size, limit total calendar.

I don't know what kind of executives you're used to, but my executives don't like to be told that they have a limit to what they can do, so we don't mess with that. And the server admin preferences are not much different. Again, very, very simple. There's the data source or data store, which is sort of automatic. You shouldn't go messing around with that anyway.

Your maximum quota is authentication, host name, port, SSL. The real magic with iCal happens on the client preference side, and that's what we're looking at now. This is the iCal preferences, and you can set up an account. You can set how often you check. You can set your availability, the server settings. That's not very exciting. The real magic happens with delegation. This is where you decide whose calendar I see and who sees my calendar.

And do they see it, or do they get to see it, and they get to add to it? And so, I think that's a really important thing. Yeah, that's the delegation. And so what's interesting, again, is the power is on the client side, not the server side. So that's a little bit of a different position for that.

And speaking in terms of calendaring, there's -- we're kind of in a unique time because now, again, with the announcements this week, there's been a lot of talk about push calendaring, push e-mail, push calendaring, push address books. Everything's push. Well, not everybody up to this day supported CalDAV, and so the way that we were able to sync our iCal calendars, we used something called Busy Sync. And that allowed us to pick the calendars that we want to publish to Google, and then it's a two-way sync configuration. Whatever you added on the web interface showed up in your iCal and vice versa.

And down the road, when and if, you know, Google decides to support CalDAV or MobileMe, which will currently support that, obviously, that might change. But currently, what this allows us to do is have our iCal clients and our Google web interface be the same, so that no matter who -- where we are, using Google Teams and Enterprise, if that's what you use, then it all syncs up great.

The directory app utility. No, directory, yes, directory app utility. Not to be confused with directory utility utility. This is great because, again, you authenticate to the server, to the directory. It has your information, email, your Jabra account, which should already be auto-added, and then it's got a map down there.

So if you wanted to come talk to me, you could hit the map, and then you could see where I sat. You could also see conference rooms, conference phones. Where are these things? So, again, it's great for resource planning, and it ties right into iCal server. You can see who's available, when they're available, and it's... I like to map things a lot. Always know where you are. Again, a lot of information in the discussion groups.

Time Machine, okay. Time Machine. We have a couple of different configurations for Time Machine, but again, server preferences. Allow, not allow. Skip system files. We have our own build. We use NetBoot to restore machines that we're setting up that are brand new or that have gone busted and need to be replaced.

So we skip system files. We're only interested in a user's home folder, typically sans music and movies, but that's all set up client side. And the server admin preferences are even simpler. There's not a lot to mess around with. You enable Time Machine backup destination and you set the correct permissions. Just as an aside, I don't know if you can see it there, com.apple_vpn.

I tried changing that to what I thought was correct, which is com.apple_backup, and that kept going back to access VPN because it shares the same group ID. I think it's 251. So the access VPN, the backup, and the chats groups all share the same group ID number, but it works. So that may be fixed in an upcoming solution. So we also have a couple of time capsules. We have two terabyte time capsules that we use to backup people daily. We use the airport utility. We use the airport utility to administer that.

And it's great. We don't use any wireless. We're not set up for wireless then. So we use all ethernet. We use groups. And even if you use groups, it's great because it's network access storage. It allows people a secure place to backup so that one person can't log in and get access to what somebody else has been backing up.

But it also still affords a public area to put stuff. So that's why it's called do not use it. Do not use. But we use groups, no guest access. The users, you log in for the first time, you select it as your backup drive, and you configure your client how you want it. And then it works pretty well.

So now, some of the workhorses for our asset management: Apple Remote Desktop, LandRev. Apple Remote Desktop, again, one of those things, if you've ever worked at a help desk or if you've ever had to manage a help desk, how you manage remote sites, that all changed with Apple Remote Desktop.

And so, The way we use it, it's kind of a very quick side. I always have it open, and I've got it labeled so that I can see at a really quick glance, okay, red is old machines, green are new machines. You can list it. You can do reporting, smart lists. You can also do command line. You can install applications. It's really quick. It's really quick, and I wouldn't say dirty. It's actually been a lifesaver in some instances. And, of course, it allows you to control multiple machines with one click.

and LANREV, and I'm going to get off the notes for a minute. LANREV is kind of an interesting tool because it's true enterprise-worthy asset management. You can, the interface, despite what it looks like up there, it's actually really intuitive. It's really elegant. You can do computer tracking, server flexibility.

We've got staging servers in L.A., New York, and San Francisco. They all talk to one another. It's customizable. The developers are really good at adding features that you need. There's a lot of custom fields that you can put information in. License management, who's got what applications, how many do we have, what's legal, what's not legal. Software distribution, it's really convenient. Hardware management. And just yesterday, over at the Hotel Monaco in one of the rooms, we've been looking for a machine that went missing on the last lease return.

And one of my colleagues had LANREV pulled up, and he says, I've been trying to track this machine for about three months now. And he had it set so that you could take pictures of the desktop. So we looked at the desktop, and we tried to figure out, okay, who's got this machine? Where are they logging in? That sort of thing. We finally narrowed it down.

We found out who it was. And I just thought it was amazing. So computer tracking is not just in the office. If this machine goes missing, and essentially if they do anything except wipe the machine, if they delete accounts and add a new account, you'll be able to track this machine. So I'm actually, I can't wait to get back to the office and give this person a call. We'll find out what his opinion is of the missing machine.

So this is our edit bay room, and it's, that's a, it's not a very nice picture, but you get an idea, this is one of our machine rooms. We have XSERV RAIDs, XSERVs, that's our Qlogic. This is what we use for our testing and broadcast, pre-production stuff. All of our Final Cut edit bays are connected by fiber optics. We use, again, Qlogic Sandbox 5200 series switches, blazing fast.

The XSERV RAID volume mounts on the desktop, they use it for scratch disks. We back it up using an HP tape library backbone software, nothing too fancy about that. And if you're new or if you're, if you've not experienced XSAN, XSAN is great. It just simply allows you to put together a lot of separate data storage. In this case, we've got three XSERV RAIDs. You put them together, and it's very fast and it handles a lot of data really well. So that's administration, I think. We're at the conclusion.

So hopefully, what we're gonna take away from here, number one, the iPhone, it's gonna change the way that you do business, it's gonna change the way, in fact, it has for us with 3G, with the speeds, with the web interface, with email, with push, active sync, all of this stuff. It's now truly an enterprise ready piece of technology. I've been immersed in it for now for a year, and it's hard for me to remember, like, what did I have to do before this?

Well, I had to answer a lot of cell phone calls, carry a laptop around, and all that kind of stuff. And now with application development, and Apple is, I think they're pushing, I think the number is 10 million for this year, and I've heard even estimates 18 million.

Who knows, that's a lot. So I think you can expect your user base to start demanding iPhone integration. My advice is start talking about it, to your executives before they start talking about it to you. Let them know that you're on the ball, and that you know this is something great to have.

Also, Beta test. Test early, test small, and often. That's the great thing, and that's why I brought up the Mac Mini all the time. It doesn't take a big investment. You don't have to invest in the big iron to set up small deployments, small pods, and if it goes bust, you're not hurting anybody but yourself and your time and energy. Once you get something set up, you can expand it beyond.

Then you can invest into the XRs, the XR raids, or whatever sort of enterprise-class storage system that you have available. We can beta test more efficiently because it doesn't take a lot of money. It doesn't take an army of people to do this. The Media Arts Lab is two people in the IT department. TBWA, I think, has a lot more. Also, mix-and-match technologies. Apple technologies are meant to work in concert, just like the Apple get a Mac says.

They work together, and hopefully, as we saw earlier, when we combined A and B to get C, that it was something new and unexpected and practical that helped us either communicate or be productive or be creative. An experiment with different kinds of implementations. You know, if you take the time to try things and test things, I think you'd be surprised at what you find.

Get to know the groups. Everybody needs a helping hand, support. And that's what the discussion groups are there for. Discussion groups are a wealth of experience and expertise. It's open all the time. It's free. And I typically ask questions under a different name and answer questions under my own name. So I'm definitely up there. It definitely is something worth doing. And there's the discussions again at Apple.com.
