---
Title:  App Store Distribution and Marketing for Games
Year:   2013
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/tech-talks/2013-24/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Hi, everyone. My name is Alex Rofman. I hope you're all having a good day. I manage a team of people back in Cupertino whose responsibility it is to help you be successful on the App Store. So I'll kick off our lunchtime session with some tips and tricks to help you do so. Then I'll pass it off to my colleague, Steve McGuigan, who will talk to you about App Store marketing. And then our colleague, Shannon Bruce, will give you some tips and tricks on iTunes Connect. So let's get started with a business update.

2013 has been a fantastic year for the App Store. In May, the 50 billionth app was downloaded from the store. And then in October, at our iPad event, we announced that the 60 billionth app had been downloaded, nearly half of which happened in the prior 12 months. Tremendous momentum behind the business. 2013 has been a fantastic year for the App Store. In May, the 50 billionth app was downloaded from the store. And then in October, at our iPad event, we announced that the 60 billionth app had been downloaded, nearly half of which happened in the prior 12 months.

Tremendous momentum behind the business. This is a statistic that we're perhaps most proud of for a number of reasons. First, none of the competitive services have announced a single figure about how much you, developers, are making distributing your apps on their platforms. And we understand that for you to continue to invest in iOS, there needs to be a return on your investment. So we couldn't be prouder that this number keeps going up and to the right.

And then in July, the App Store celebrated its fifth birthday. I joined the team in July of 2009, 59 billion downloads ago and billions and billions and billions of dollars ago. It's really incredible to think that the business has only been around for five years. We hope you're as excited as we are about what the next five years of the App Store might bring.

There are 575 million accounts associated with the App Store, most of which have credit cards tied to them, which gives you as developer an unprecedented opportunity to acquire customers from all over the world. The App Store catalog now stands at more than one million apps with thousands more added on a weekly basis. And when you look at just games, there are 180,000 games available in the store, 100,000 of which are made for the beautiful larger palette of the iPad.

Taking a look at the App Store catalog by content type for games, we see that 45% of games available in the store are iPhone only, 13% are iPad only, and 41% are what we call universal apps, where one download works on all of a customer's devices. The catalog is tremendously active with more than 90% of all apps available downloaded on a monthly basis. And there's tremendous velocity in this business. More than 800 apps are downloaded every second. To give you a sense of scale, by the end of our lunchtime session, nearly 4.5 million apps will have been downloaded by App Store customers from around the world.

So that's the business update. Next, I want to give you a quick overview of the App Store to help you understand how the business is structured and managed. The App Store is a global business available in 155 countries around the world. But this is not just about a distribution footprint.

There's a real revenue opportunity for developers to distribute their apps all over the world. 61% of Apple's revenue comes from outside the United States. And this is a vastly different percentage than from when before the App Store launched. All across the world we have hand-curated stores programmed in the local language where local currency is accepted. Here's our North and South American stores. Here's our European stores.

[ Transcript missing ]

As I said, the way we do that is by curating the App Store. Here's a couple screenshots from the App Store. You see the featured page on the left, the games category page, which is one of 24 category pages programmed and curated in major markets around the world.

And then on the right, you see the Design for iOS 7 collection, which is one of dozens and dozens of thematic and seasonal collections that have every app that someone might need for a particular topic. On the iPad, same curation, just more real estate for more great apps. On a weekly basis, our editors around the world are choosing the best apps and the best games and denoting them as editor's choice. Here's a few recent selections.

And also on a weekly basis, we curate what we call the Free App of the Week program, where a well-localized paid game or app that's universal is made available for free for our customers to download. Apple waives its commissions as part of this program. The developer waives its royalties as part of this program. And customers around the world have really enjoyed getting a great piece of paid content for free.

Here's three more pages from the App Store. Charts page, recently launched popular Near Me page in the center, and a search results page on the right. These pages are not curated on the App Store. The business is five years old. We work with thousands and thousands of developers.

Not a week goes by when we don't get the question, how do I improve the placement of my app in search results? And while keywords have some impact in where your app shows up when a user searches for something, the most important thing that you as a developer can do is build something great that our customers love and the algorithms will take care of the rest.

So to give you a quick overview of the App Store editorial process, first and foremost, our selections are based on quality and quality alone. There is no paid placement in the App Store. We've never accepted any money for placement in the store and we have no plans to do so.

The process of choosing apps to feature is separate from the app review process. Apps are approved or rejected based on their adherence to our App Store review guidelines. Just because your app is approved, however, does not mean that it will be featured. We consider apps from all 24 categories with a particular focus on new apps or apps with significant updates. And lastly, while newly approved apps are added to the store on a continual basis, new featured content is added to the store on a weekly basis, typically Thursdays. So that's the App Store overview. Next, let's dig into some best practices.

So first, your App Store presence. This is your app name, your app icon, your screenshots, your description, and your keywords. In many cases, the first introduction of your brand to App Store customers. If your head's down in development, it's very easy to overlook these things, but with a little bit of time and attention, they're not very difficult to do well.

So let's take a look at Clash of Clans as an example. The name, short, unique, memorable, with no keywords or descriptives attached to it. The icon, incredibly and beautifully designed, stands out on a user's home screen and is instantly recognizable. Next, let's take a look at their screenshots. Your screenshots should tell a story.

You should avoid distracting overlays or graphics. And you can see here, while the Clash of Clans game has a lot going on in the game screens, they put these nice banners at the top that explain to the user what each screenshot is meant to represent. Wage epic battles. Coordinate attacks with your clan. Fight against goblins or other players. Dominate the realm. So real concise and clear messaging to the customer about what their experience might be if they start using Clash of Clans.

Next, let's take a look at their app description. Lead your clan to victory. Clash of Clans is an epic combat strategy game. Build your village, train your troops, and battle with thousands of other players online. So this is taken from the product page in the iPhone app store for Clash of Clans.

It's optimized for the device. The first three or four lines are most important. You shouldn't require the user to tap on the more button to learn about your game. This game has received many, many accolades. The game has been named for its success by the Chinese and American players.

It's a game that's been recognized by the world for its high performance, and it's a game that's been recognized by the world for its high performance. It's a game that's been recognized by the world for its high performance. It's a game that's been recognized by the world for its high performance. It's a game that's been recognized by the world for its high performance.

It's a game that's been recognized by the world for its high performance. It's a game that's and also be purchased for real money. If you don't want to use this feature, please disable in-app purchases in your device's settings. This is not necessary, but this is just a real great message to send to customers who might not be familiar with the free to play model and might not be familiar with how to turn off in-app purchasing in their device's settings.

Next, let's take a look at keywords. So I can't share with you what Clash of Clans keywords are because they're confidential, but let's look at some sample keywords for a word game. So word, word games, spell, spelling, letter, letters, and scrabble. These are not very good keywords for the App Store for a number of reasons. So first, you see the word word is duplicated. You also don't need to include the category name as a keyword. Our system handles that. You also don't need to include plural. So you see letter and letters here.

Include the singular, our system will handle the plural. And then in terms of using third-party names like scrabble, it's only okay to use the name of a third-party in your keyword if your app or game uses an API provided by that third-party. So here's a much better, much stronger set of keywords for a word game. Word, letter, spell, board, dictionary, friend, family, and alphabet. So again, that's your App Store presence. Your name, your icon, your screenshots, your description, and your keywords. Not very challenging to do well with just a little time and attention.

So next I want to talk about business models. And the first business model advice we have for you is to build a universal app. Yes, this is a product decision, but it's also a business decision as well for a number of reasons. First, our customers love the convenience of being able to download a single app that works on all of their devices as shown in this animation here.

And looking back at the App Store games catalog by content type, while we see growth in all key metrics, catalog size, sales, and downloads for iPhone apps, iPad apps, and universal apps, by far we see the highest growth for universal apps because our customers are responding to that convenience. The data also shows that customers are not inclined to download or purchase two separate versions of the same title.

So next, how do you choose the right business model for your product? So there's no single piece of advice that I can stand up here and give you that applies to every product you guys are building or already have in the App Store. But my goal is to give you a few key takeaways to help you make a better decision.

So here are three of the possible business models available to you in the store. On the left, you see a free only product. Typically, these are ad supported or meant to support broader brand strategies. And often, very often, we see developers with ad supported games put a remove ads in app SKU into their product and that's their business model. Well, as you'll see a little bit later in my freemium discussion, that doesn't make your app freemium. There's no chance for ongoing monetization if that's the only way to do it.

In the center, paid apps. There's a lot of chatter on the blogs and in the media that the market for paid apps and paid games on the App Store is dead. And as someone who looks at this data every day for the last four plus years, I can tell you that's flat out not true. Paid titles still represent a significant portion of the App Store business.

There's no shortage of customers willing to pay and seeking out that premium experience. And then on the right, you see a model we call Paymium, where the paymium is a model that allows you to pay for the app you're using. There's no shortage of customers willing to pay for the app you're using.

And then on the left, you see a model we call Paymium, where the paymium is a model that allows you to pay for the app you're using. Freemium is a business model where a product or service is provided for free, but money is charged for advanced features, functionality, or virtual goods. So to my point about a remove ads in app SKU in a game, that doesn't really fit with this definition.

And freemium is a model that many developers are seeing success with in the store. Puzzle games, racing games, time management games. But looking at the games catalog broken down by business model, you can see more than 75% of games available in the App Store have a business model that is not freemium. It is not the right model for every product.

And while I'm sure you notice the success of freemium games on the top grossing charts on the App Store in particular, what you don't notice is that the app store is not a business model. What you don't see are all the well done, highly rated games that chose the wrong business model and never made it onto the charts.

So again, my goal here is to help you make a good decision if you're considering freemium as your business model. To help you do so, we've developed a framework that involves three questions that you should consider. The first, what are your target market's expectations? So what I mean here is from a business model perspective, don't try to fit a square peg into a round hole.

To explain what I mean, let me walk you through a few examples. So let's take Scrabble. Scrabble is a brand that has existed in the physical world for many, many decades. The target market expectations for a brand like Scrabble are that it's a premium product. You pay a single price and you can play Scrabble as many times as you want with as many people as you want.

In contrast, if you look at racing games or time management games, there are expectations among gamers of those types of games that through skill and experience, they can acquire enhancements or expand their game. So make sure your business model fits with what your target market might expect. As we walk through this discussion, let's take a look at the funnel for downloads. So at the top, you see downloads. This is your target market. Being free will not make everyone in the world download your app, but it may expand your reach within your target market.

The next question in the framework is can you segment the experience between free and paid? If as a developer running a business you decide that you're not interested in acquiring free users, that's completely fine. Just don't choose freemium as your model. The most successful freemium products and apps and games in the store are providing a tremendous amount of value to both free and paid users. The reason why is that the path to monetization in freemium is through engagement. And if you throw up a paywall as soon as a user launches your game, you're not giving them a chance to get engaged and you're not giving yourselves a chance to monetize that customer.

So the next piece of the funnel is retention. This is the percent of your target market that is getting some kind of value out of your product and continues to use it. So before I move on to the final question in the framework, let's take a look at the typical game loop for a freemium game. At the top, you see action. This is winning a battle or winning a race. Next, you see reward.

Typically in freemium products, this is currency. And then you see expansion, which is you use that currency to buy a new car or expand, buy new tires or buy new weapons for your battle. So what's important, and the reason I'm sharing this with you today is to be successful in freemium, it is very important to be successful in freemium. It is very important that you allow progression through this game loop without requiring users to pay. That might be a hard thing for people to swallow if you're running a business, but again, then freemium might not be the right model for you.

So the last piece of the framework is do you have a plan to create lasting value? This is twofold. This is your plan as a developer to have a rich plan for updates, content and features updates over time. And this also relates to the inherent value of the product itself. If you're building something that only has 30 minutes or one hour of gameplay, there's probably not any lasting value in that for users. So freemium is probably not the right model for you.

Which brings us to the last piece of the funnel, which is conversion. The percent of those who have retained, who've decided to pay. So do the math. It's incredibly important to determining whether freemium is the right model for you. If you have a niche game, you might see a higher retention and a higher conversion and a higher average spread so the math can work out for you.

Or in contrast, if you're building something with broad market appeal, you might see millions and millions of downloads, but maybe a lower retention, lower conversion, lower average spread, but the math can still work out because the numbers are so big. So start with your target market and do the math from that point forward. So you've gone through the framework, you've done the math, and you've decided that freemium is right for you. So what are the next steps?

So again, first, identify and focus on your target market. Have a business model that's consistent with what your target market might expect. Next, prioritize engagement before monetization. You're not doing yourself any service if you throw up a paywall as soon as a user launches your game. Give them a chance to get engaged. Give them a chance to find some value out of your product.

Incorporate the business model into the early stages of your product design. If you've built something great and beautiful without any regard for the business model and at the 11th hour right before you launch, you put an in-app store in there, it's not going to feel native or natural to customers and chances are, again, they're not going to get engaged.

So consider the business model from the very, very beginning of your product design. Track your metrics. And the takeaway here is don't be afraid to tune your economy if freemium is right for you or freemium is not right for you. Don't be afraid to switch to a different business model.

Treat your game as a service. The most successful freemium games in the store really are treated as services by their developers with constant live updates and really endless amounts of value, entertainment value that gamers can get from their products. And then lastly, protect and respect our mutual customers. When I say protect our customers, if you're building a game targeted towards kids, put yourself in the parents' shoes.

Consider A, whether freemium's right to begin with, but if it is, consider the number of in-app SKUs you might make available and consider whether you need that $99 in-app SKU in your kids-focused product. And then when I talk about respecting customers, this ties back to what I've been saying. Give them a chance to get engaged. Don't put a paywall in front of them as soon as they launch your product.

So that's my discussion on freemium. Next, we'll talk about pricing. So the App Store runs under the agency model, which means that you as a developer have sole control over the price of your app. Our guidance here is twofold. Price thoughtfully and take a look at the competition.

If you're building a casual game that's meant to compete with Angry Birds and you want to charge $5 or $10 for it, chances are you're probably not going to do well because the market for that type of game is $0.99. The other key takeaway here is that there's a misconception out there in the market that the only two price points that work in the App Store are free and $0.99. And again, as someone who looks at this data every day, I can tell you that that's just flat out not true.

We see many, many developers of apps and games seeing success at higher price points. Next, consider price promotions, sales. Don't do them all the time. If you do, customers will constantly be waiting for that next deal and they'll never buy your product. But well-timed price promotions are a great way to grow your business on the App Store.

So a couple last steps before you launch. First, communicate with Apple. As I said before, there's thousands and thousands of new apps added to the App Store on a weekly basis. If you've built something you're proud of, that you think we should tell our customers about, it always helps to let us know. So that first email address, appstorepromotionatapple.com, is something monitored by my team.

Tell us who you are, what you've built, and why you think our customers would enjoy your product, and we'll take a look. The second email address, appoftheweekatapple.com, if you have a well-localized paid product that you'd like to nominate for our App of the Week program, please send us your information at appoftheweekatapple.com. We'll take a look as well.

Next, plan for app review to take time. Gone are the days of app review taking weeks and weeks. Our published guidance these days is that roughly 95% of apps are reviewed within five business days or less. That being said, it's better to be safe than sorry. So plan for at least two weeks in app review, just in case last minute bug pops up or you have issues with launching your marketing campaign, things of that nature.

And then the last point here, my colleague Steve will talk about in further detail. Don't rely on your chances of being featured by the App Store as your marketing plan. There are many, many things you can do that are within your control. And as I said, Steve will talk about that more in just a few minutes. So you've launched your product. Now what?

Well, first and foremost, monitor your ratings and reviews. App Store customers are incredibly vocal. They'll tell you what you're doing well. They'll tell you what you're not doing. So you've launched your product. Now what? Well, first and foremost, monitor your ratings and reviews. App Store customers are incredibly vocal. They'll tell you what you're doing well. They'll tell you what you're not doing well. You may discover some bugs and you may get some great ideas for future updates.

Speaking of updates, launching it and leaving it is not a strategy for success in the App Store. The market is too competitive. Here's some real data from Clash of Clans. Each orange star represents a significant update they've made to the product. I had to remove the scale for confidentiality purposes, but I'm sure you all are aware that this game is pretty successful.

What's interesting to note are not just the spikes that they saw when they updated their game, but in between the updates, there's some flatness and even in some cases, some decline. So well-timed updates are a great way to build momentum in the store. Test your apps thoroughly so you can avoid constant bug fix updates, but the right timing for feature-rich or content-rich updates is roughly every four to six weeks.

Next, use push notifications and sharing. On the left, you see push notification screen. Avoid using notifications in a way that might be perceived as spam or marketing by our customers, but well-timed, well-written push notifications are a great way to bring people back to your product. And then on the right, if people love using your game and they're proud of their accomplishments, use our share sheet functionality and make it easy for them to tell others about it.

Next, monitor your sales and trends. This might seem obvious, but you'd be surprised at how many people don't do this. There's a wealth of data available to you in iTunes Connect. There's a vibrant ecosystem of third parties whose existence is to help you optimize your business on iOS. You never know what you might discover, especially a market where you didn't think your app was doing well in, but it is, and there's a great idea for a future update to add the localization for that market.

So that's my discussion on best practices. Next, we'll talk a little bit about localization. So as I said before, the App Store is a global business in 155 countries around the world. So as a developer, you need to think globally. There really is an unprecedented opportunity for you to acquire customers from all corners of the globe. But one size doesn't fit all. There's lots of cultural and linguistic differences from country to country.

So to be successful, you need to not only think globally, but you need to be local. And what I mean by that is to localize. And I want to walk you through the example of Where's My Water To in France to help you understand. So this is the icon. So their name in French, Ma Oue est Swampie Deux.

So it would have been very easy for them to use the English name in France, but they decided not to do that. They localized the name in a way that's... that speaks directly to French customers. Next, their app description. As you probably can tell, my French is a little bit rusty, so I'm not going to read this to you.

But here's the description for Where's My Water To in French, optimized for device, written in a way that speaks directly to French customers. Their screenshots. Here's the screenshots from their U.S. App Store. Would have been very easy for them to do this because they're mostly visual in nature. But they didn't do it. They changed the text to French to speak directly to that market.

So again, localize your app name, your app description, your screenshots, and all of the contents of your app. There's also something called culturalization. And to show you what I mean here, I have a short video that I want to show you. So this is a trailer for Need for Speed Online in China.

The tracks that the cars are racing through are from China. The road signage, the billboards, they're in Chinese. The audio, they hired Beijing police to record the audio for this game. Chinese gamers love competing against their friends, so they built a tournament mode and leaderboards so they could track their progress. And while culturalization doesn't necessarily apply to every game, where there's a fit, it will absolutely make a difference.

So that's culturalization. So languages. Here's the list of recommended languages for localization if you have something that's globally relevant. English, French, Italian, German, and Spanish. The Asian languages, traditional and simplified Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. Brazilian, Portuguese, Russian, Turkish, and Arabic. This is not prioritized, but this is the group of languages that we recommend you start with if you have a globally relevant product.

So let's look at some more data to show you that localization actually does have an impact. Again, we thank Supercell for letting us share this data with you. This is Clash of Clans and their Chinese localization. And I had to remove the scale. They were doing pretty well. That scale on the left is not an insignificant number. But there was no growth.

And at the orange star, they localized into Chinese. And look what happened. 3% to 400% sales growth. In Japan, same thing for Clash of Clans. A little bit of growth, not doing quite as well as they were in China, but massive growth when they tune their product for the Japanese market.

And let's take a look at the charts. Here's a recent screenshot of the charts from China, Japan, and France. With all but two exceptions here, Angry Birds and Clash of Clans that have gone the branding route with their app name, not their full apps, just the app name, every app you see at the top of the charts here is localized for these individual markets. And on top of that, our local editors in these markets have a very strong preference for promoting localized apps.

So again, think globally, but be local. And Apple provides a number of resources to help you to do so. There's the URL at the top. You'll find some tips and tricks for localization on this page, as well as a list of third-party localization vendors if you don't have the linguistic expertise in-house to localize into dozens of languages. So that's my talk on localization. And last but not least, getting featured.

So first and foremost, focus on what you can control, and that's building something great and unique that our customers love. Next, have a strong App Store presence. These things matter. We put our stamp of approval on apps and games that we feature, and you should well represent who you are and what you've built and make a strong introduction to our customers.

Choose the right business model and price thoughtfully. Offer customers a universal binary. Localize in relevant markets. And lastly, communicate with the App Store team. So that's my talk for today. Thank you very much. And now I'll turn it over to my colleague, Steve McGuigan, to talk about App Store marketing.

Good afternoon. My name is Steve McGuigan and I look after marketing for the App Store. You know, we spend a lot of time thinking about apps at Apple and not just on the App Store, but Apple as a whole. And we love marketing apps through our many channels. Many of the apps come from some of the audience members here. The channels we market through are television, print. You'll see us marketing apps on billboards throughout cities.

We market apps through our over 400 retail locations around the globe and our thousands of channel partners. We spend a lot of time and energy marketing apps on apple.com, as well as to the hundreds of millions of emails that we send out to our customers on a monthly basis. And then finally, we speak to nearly 11 million fans and followers on social media every single day.

But as Alex said earlier, you control much of your success on the App Store. You are not dependent upon getting featured. Your success, of course, starts with a great app, but that success will be propelled by having a great marketing plan. And that's what I'm here to talk to you about today.

I'm going to begin by talking about three programs that we've created to help you not only monetize, but also help you promote your apps. I'll talk about some of the resources we've made available to you to make your marketing look great. And then I'll conclude by talking about the components that make up a comprehensive marketing campaign.

So let's begin with the programs and resources. I've been hearing for quite some time that developers have been looking for a way for them to market their apps to customers for free without making their app free on the App Store. So I'm proud to announce a new program that we're calling the App Store Code Program.

This program will provide you, the developer, the ability to market free offers to your customers by using unique 12-digit codes. Currently, the program is focused on offering your paid apps downloaded for free. Now, these are different than those 100 promo codes that you can request out of iTunes Connect.

Those should be used for your PR purposes, which I'll talk about later. These codes will come in a much higher volume, and they should be used for large marketing campaigns. Now it's a completely free program. You as the developer would waive your 70% royalties and we as Apple would waive our 30% commission. And when you receive these codes, you can distribute them digitally or physically. And I'll provide some examples for you in a few slides.

So let's first talk about the benefits of this program. First, you will be able to create an impactful and a high-value marketing promotion. It will not only aid in user acquisition, but it also can be used in an engagement tool with some of your existing customers. The beauty of this is that it's built into iOS. So the redemption flow is simple, frictionless, and will produce a consistent user experience.

So let me get into a couple of examples for you so you can understand how these codes can work for you. And the first is a digital distribution example from our friends at Big Fish Games. They have a paid app called Fairway Solitaire and they wanted to do a marketing campaign targeted at golf enthusiasts and game enthusiasts. So they created this banner or this ad that they presented through various mobile sites addressing that targeted audience.

The customer would see the ad and they would tap on get it free where they'd be presented with this terms and conditions page. But Big Fish had a great idea. They said, why don't we leverage this opportunity to share this promotion through social networks? So they give the customer the ability to go share this through Facebook and Twitter.

But back to the redemption flow. The customer would tap on the "Get it free" button, at which point the App Store would launch automatically, and the customer would just simply type in their password. That 12-digit code is automatically populated into the redeem field. So all the customer needs to do at this point is tap redeem and the app begins to download. A very simple experience for the customer.

But you also have an opportunity to distribute these codes and activate your customers at a physical location. And Halfbrick came to us, the makers of Fruit Ninja, and they had a great idea. They wanted to celebrate the anniversary of Fruit Ninja and they thought they would produce a high quality event in public venues throughout Australia.

So the idea they came to us with was they'll create a kiosk, it would have eight iPads around it, a few flat screens, and customers could come up and play Fruit Ninja. They would put signage out about town driving people to this event and they would keep track of the high scores that day as they were trying to find Australia's next Fruit Ninja master.

Well, they took it a step further and created four of these kiosks and placed these in shopping malls and parks around Melbourne and Sydney recently. And while customers were engaging with Fruit Ninja, they would provide them a physical card and each card had its own unique 12-digit code on it. On the back, it explained how to redeem. It said, launch the app store, plug in your password, type in that 12-digit code that you saw on the front of the card, and tap redeem. And your app then downloads for free.

[ Transcript missing ]

We want to make sure that it's a great experience for our mutual customers, so the offer needs to be open. In other words, you can't require somebody to pay for these codes that you're eventually giving away for free, or you can't require them to give you a mailing address or an email address. We want it to be a delightful experience for everybody.

We'd ask that you track your distribution. We'd like to know how many codes you're putting through which channels. And then, of course, you would need our approval to move forward. So how do you do that? Well, it's quite simple. Send us an email at appstorecodes@apple.com. We will send you back a template.

We'll ask you to fill out that will describe the campaign that you're hoping to run, which countries you want to run it in, what kind of distribution you want to do. And once we approve that, we'll send you an agreement that you sign. You send us the agreement back, and then we'll deliver you the codes.

Now, one of the great benefits of this is that you can track your redemptions in the Sales and Trends Report that you already look at through iTunes Connect. So you can see the performance of your campaign and the results on a daily basis. So that's our new App Store Code Program.

The second program I want to discuss with you is iAd. As you likely know, iAd is Apple's digital advertising platform. And we know that you spend an enormous amount of time producing great games. And we know you don't want to degrade that experience by serving up poor quality ads. And that's where iAd comes in. iAd serves compelling, rich media ads. And it's now available in 14 countries. Just this week we launched in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Ireland to round it out.

Now there's two aspects to iAd. There's the monetization and there's the promotion. So let's begin by talking about the monetization side of iAd and how you can leverage iAd to generate revenue within your game. Well, by serving up iAds within your game, you will receive a 70% revenue share for every iAd that you serve.

And the network is both flexible and noncompetitive. What I mean is that while you're serving iAds, you are still able to still go out there and sell your own ads if you want. You also have the ability to block your competitors from showing up within your game. So if you want to prevent certain apps or certain brands from showing up, you can do that.

As I said earlier, iAd serves compelling rich media ads and you can track your results in real time. You can see the revenue, the taps, the clicks that are occurring as they're occurring within your app. To get started, it's quite simple. Simply go into iTunes Connect, fill out the iAd contract, implement the iAd framework within your app, and then submit it for review. And you should be off and running.

So that's the monetization side. Let's talk about the promotion side and how you can leverage iAd to drive downloads of your apps. And for that, we introduced iAd Workbench back at WWDC this past summer. iAd Workbench is a do-it-yourself campaign creation and management tool. And when we announced it this summer, it was available in the US only. But as of this week, it's now available in all 14 countries that I mentioned earlier.

So I'm going to talk about campaign creation and the analytics that we serve. So let's begin by talking about the campaign creation. It takes just a couple of minutes to get your campaign up and running. It's five simple steps. You must first, of course, select the app you want to promote, which is your app.

Then you need to select your audience. And for the non-marketers in the room, it could not be simpler. By selecting automatic, we will find the best audience for you based upon the integration that iAd has with the App Store. But for the marketers that are out here, you can do your own manual targeting. There's eight different criteria you can select, whether it's gender, whether it's age, whether it's region or interest within the App Store. You can do as much targeting as you want.

The third step is to tell iAd how much you want to spend over what period of time and then you upload your creative. Now if you don't have the creative resources in your company to do this, we actually have four templates that you can use, varying colors and fonts, to make it look unique for yourself. And then you submit your campaign and you'll get a response within 24 hours and you'll be up and running.

Now, once your campaign is running, we provide a dashboard of analytics. We provide a macro view of the account that allows you to monitor your campaigns but also initiate new ones. But then you can get into the detailed statistics of the campaign if you want. You can look at specific time periods. You can look at your spend, your impressions, your downloads, your taps, your tap-through rates, and then your cost per click and your cost per acquisition. And you can also export this data as a CSV file that you can import then into your own analytics package.

Now, we spent over an hour talking about this at WWDC this past summer, so I don't have enough time to go any deeper, but we have resources available to you online, and additionally, there's some folks in the lab from the iAd team that can get you up and running if you have any questions.

So the third program I want to talk to you briefly about is our affiliate program. The affiliate program allows you to earn a 7% commission when promoting apps, including your own games, and any other content that we sell through iTunes, whether it's TV, movies, music, or books. But what most developers don't know about is that you can use our affiliate program to track your marketing campaigns. You can track your sales of your paid apps and your free apps and see how they perform by channel. I'll explain that to you how to do that in just a moment.

So we are now rolling out a brand new program with a new partner called PHG that's going to provide a single partner now for our affiliate program in 100 countries around the globe. And one of the biggest benefits about this new partner is the fact that the URL scheme is much easier. You simply just select your URL out of the App Store and append your unique affiliate token. That's all you need to do to begin receiving that 7% commission.

But that added benefit I mentioned to you earlier is the campaign tracking. You can append a campaign token to the end of the URL and append any 40-character string to the end of that. So let's say you want to track an email performance or you wanted to track the performance of a particular web campaign. You can do this and you can see your results in real time to see how they're performing. It's a huge benefit to developers that don't have a deeper analytics package.

Given that it's a global program, we've now localized the resources into 24 languages, and we now offer the ability for you to receive payment in over 100 different currencies from around the globe. We provide a myriad of additional tools. We can create banners for any store content. We provide interactive widgets. We have a search API, an RSS feed, as well as an enterprise partner feed where you can download all the metadata for every bit of content for everything that we sell to help in your marketing. So that's our affiliate program.

Now I'd like to briefly talk about some of the marketing resources that we have provided to you to help make your marketing look great. We provide these on the iOS Dev Center, but sometimes it's hard to find, so you simply have to go to appstore.com slash marketing to get directly to this page. Here, we provide the App Store marketing guidelines. We provide links to Apple Assets, which we'll talk about in a second, as well as links to a number of tools.

So first, let me touch base on the marketing guidelines. We just completely rewrote these. They are simpler and much easier to follow. And the reason we produce these is to give you advice and direction on how best to market your apps using our assets. And those assets include the App Store badges as well as the device images. Now we just localized these guidelines into Spanish, Italian, German, and French this week. And that's in addition to simplified Chinese, traditional Chinese, and Japanese. And we'll roll out some additional languages here very soon.

So let's talk briefly about the App Store badges. And we really encourage you guys to use this in all of your marketing because App Store customers understand this badge as a call to action. And it says that your app is available and ready for download. So use it in all of your marketing.

But when using it, it's important that you lead with your brand, your title, explaining why your app or your game is as great as it is. And use the App Store badge in a subordinate position. We want you to lead with the greatness of your app. We've also made it easier for you to market internationally. And if you follow Alex's guidance earlier and localize your app, we've now provided localized App Store badges in 38 languages for use around the world.

As I mentioned earlier, we provided Apple device images for you. So we've provided high resolution assets for iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch in both white and black. And when using the device images, please use actual screenshots from your app and think about those screenshots that exemplify really the beauty and the magic of your app.

And avoid covering up the beauty of your game with these marketing messages and these violators. That really does distract from the magic of your app. Put that stuff to the side and really focus on your content. Now, if the creative direction you're heading down doesn't, if the assets we provide don't work for that creative direction, you can take your own photos, your own videography, and we provide you some guidance on how best to do that through our marketing guidelines.

So that's it on the programs and resources. I'm going to spend the last 15 minutes or so here talking about the components of a comprehensive marketing campaign. Now, I've met with a number of you today and I understand that the marketing budgets of you vary in this audience from a zero dollar marketing budget to maybe millions of dollars.

And my goal here is to share with you various channels that hopefully there's a tidbit of information and tips that will help all of you here in this audience, depending upon your budget. So I've broken it down into two buckets. Owned channels are more or less free and paid channels are obviously those you have to pay. So let's jump in to the owned channels first, and we'll start with social media.

Social media is one of the most effective channels that you can use to market your app. I know you know this, but it's important that you plan that social media strategy from the very beginning. How can you integrate social media into your game experience? As Alex said earlier, ShareSheet is one great way of doing that. It's very simple to share maybe high scores, milestones, and achievements through ShareSheet.

But I also want you to think about how you can leverage social media to maybe supplement your game. You know, instead of using social media just as a broadcast mechanism, how can you use it to bring content back into your game? See where your friends are at certain levels or things like that.

Now, while this isn't a game example, it is a great example, and this is with RunKeeper. RunKeeper actually leverages social media where you can have your friends and family motivate you and cheer you on for a run through social media. So it's a different way to look at social media and how to augment your app.

But beyond that, you need to think about how you're going to build your brand presence on social media and what is your content strategy going to be. So there's three things I want to leave you with. The first, remember that when you are posting content, those posts are going to be nestled amongst the posts of your customers, friends, and family. So be engaging. Be conversational. Don't continually just sell, sell, sell all the time. Get them to engage with your content.

and think about how you can get them to arrest the thumb. We all flip through our news feeds very quickly. And what gets us to stop is that compelling image or that compelling copy. And if it gets you to somebody to stop and to read it, your next step is to hopefully get them to engage and share it. Which takes me to my third point. People are what they share. They share what inspires them. They share what is aspirational to them. So think about that copy that addresses both of those things, inspiration and aspiration.

So that's social media. Let's talk about email briefly. Email is likely your first opportunity to talk to a customer outside of the App Store. So that first contact is really important. Think about how you can be engaging and useful so that they don't immediately put you into their spam folder. You want to use email throughout the lifecycle of your customer with your game. So make sure that content is-- it jumps out and is engaging to them.

and optimize your emails for the devices it's being viewed on. You need to consider the image sizes that you're using, the font types, and the font sizes so that they're both viewable on both iPhone and iPad. Which brings me to my third point. You know your customer that you're talking to here is an iPhone or an iPad customer. So target those communications to them. Talk to them directly and make them feel special like they're a part of your experience.

Another thing to remember is to make your entire image clickable. When you're providing an image in your email, customers know that as a call to action and they just want to be able to tap anywhere. So don't make them sort of target and find that really small call to action. Allow them to click anywhere.

Next, use email as a way to test your marketing strategies. And one great way to do that is test your subject line. So as you're doing an email blast, segment your audience into two groups and do A/B testing and see how the results affect open rate. Take those learnings and apply them to your next email and your next email and you're going to get smarter and you're going to continue to drive great engagement.

You want to be useful in your content? So you don't, again, you don't always need to be selling. Maybe provide them tips and tricks on how to get to that next level or give them an insight of what the, you know, level 47 is going to be, whatever that's going to be. Get them to engage with your app again. And then also use email to support that social media strategy we talked about earlier. Get them to follow you on the popular social media networks.

So that's email. So now some tips for your website. Back at iOS 6, we launched a technology called Smart App Banners. With Smart App Banners, all you need to do is enter one line of code onto your website. And with that, your website will be able to detect if a customer is coming to you from an iOS device. And when that happens, a banner is presented at the top of your page.

And it's smart because it knows, in this case, whether or not I have Diamond Dash installed on my device. If I don't, the call to action says View. And when I tap on View, I'm taken into the App Store to download the app. But if I do have the app installed already, it says Open.

And I have the ability to just tap on that, and then it launches the game directly. It's important to optimize your website for mobile. Very similar to what I said with email. Think about your image size and your font type and your font sizes so that you can engage with it on a smaller form factor like the iPhone.

and provide multiple install points. Once the customer begins scrolling through your page and they lose that smart app banner, provide the App Store badge on there so they can click on it and download your game. Again, support that social media strategy. Allow your customers to follow you on Facebook and Twitter or other networks. And then finally, provide a link to customer care or an FAQ so that you can address your customers' problems directly rather than them leaving you negative feedback on the App Store and affecting your ratings.

Now the next channel I want to talk about briefly is cross promotion. Many of you in the audience have multiple apps on the App Store. And I've seen some good and not so good ways that you can cross promote apps. But the thing to remember is to be thoughtful to your customers that you've already worked so hard to acquire and don't be too intrusive when you're doing that cross marketing. So I'm going to provide you three examples here of what I think is thoughtful, good cross marketing.

The first is the More Apps menu. And with Cut the Rope, they've provided this little window shade pole at the very top. And by pulling down on it, it's interactive, it supports gravity, what have you, but you can slip through the other games that ZeptoLabs provides. Another example are tickers.

These are not intrusive. So here I am looking at the Sims Free Play, and the streaming ticker at the bottom is talking about FIFA 14. It's being thoughtful, it's talking about the benefits of FIFA 14. And if I'm interested, I simply tap on it, and I'm taken to the App Store to download it.

And then the third example is what we call interactive creative. What the impossible line has done here is you can take these bubbles from the upper right-hand corner, pull them down, you can bounce them off one another, you can interact with it, but by tapping on it, it pops the bubble and then it takes you into the App Store via a store sheet.

And that's my last point I want to emphasize here is to use store sheet. By using store sheet, the customer could engage and buy this game and then once that transaction is complete, they're taken right back into the game where they were previously and you haven't lost that, their spot in the game. Next I want to talk about PR.

I want to remind you that PR does not stand for press release. Gone are the days where a press release makes a comprehensive PR campaign. It stands for public relations and it takes work. It doesn't cost you anything. It just takes your energy and effort to go out there and find the influencers out there. And that's where the promo codes come into play.

Those 100 promo codes you can pull out of iTunes Connect shouldn't be used for your brother, your sister, your mom, or your dad. Give it to the influencers out there, those people that can write about your app. And please, embargo them. Don't allow them to write about your game until your app is live on the App Store.

It really does you very little good for them to write about you, for when the audience is reading that article, they can't act on it. There's nothing for them to do. So wait for them to write about you until your app is live on the store and drive as much PR in a short amount of time as you can.

Beyond launch, you want to find an advocate. You want to find somebody that can continue to talk about your app. I see some great examples with racing games where they've gotten race car drivers to continually talk about it and show their levels as they're progressing through games. Really consider finding an advocate that can continue to talk about your game.

Now, if you do want to write a press release, make sure you can support your claims that you make. And then finally, please send them to us ahead of time for our review. You can send them to us at pressreleasesatapple.com and our PR team will look at them and give you any feedback within five business days.

So the last owned channel I want to talk about are trailers. And I love the trailers I'm seeing from the audience like you, game developers. The production value of trailers nowadays have really gone to the next step. But I want to give you a few tips and tricks of things that we like to see in trailers.

And the first thing is that you need to grab somebody's attention. And with a trailer, we have found that you have about six seconds to grab somebody's attention of whether or not they want to continue to watch what your game is about. But that being said, they do have a limited attention span. So keep your trailer to within 30 to 60 seconds.

As I said earlier, I know you work really hard to make your game look great. So use professional capturing tools to capture digitally your gaming experience. Don't have your friend look over you with a camera and record you playing with it. Use these digital capturing systems. And then support your trailer with a great soundtrack.

You're going to want to provide a clear call to action because in many cases those trailers aren't, you can't click with them. So make sure you provide the App Store badge, a vanity URL, whatever that may be to get them to go into the App Store to download your app.

And the last point I want to make about trailers is to ensure that it's globally appropriate. And there's two aspects to this. The first is price. So if your app or your game is a paid-for app, when you talk about it in one currency, that doesn't really translate to other currencies around the globe.

You know, somebody in Japan or China might not know what the conversion rate is for a euro, for example. Additionally, by talking about your specific price point, it doesn't give you the opportunity to do price promotions as well. So we really just encourage you to leave the price out of it unless your game is free.

The other aspect to being globally appropriate is the content itself. And the level at which people are offended by maybe violence or other types of content varies around the globe. So be sure that you err on the side of caution so that people will want to continue to watch these trailers. So the example I have here is from EA of their trailer for FIFA 14. And many of you may have seen this, but those that haven't, they've done a great job of really building a great trailer using many of these tactics here.

So I'll conclude by talking about two paid channels. And the first is mobile ads. I won't go too deep into here because I touched on it with iAd earlier, but one of the benefits of mobile ads obviously is that through mobile ads, it's the fewest taps away from an install.

As you're engaging with a game or an app or a website, when you see those banner ads, it's one tap and you're downloading the content within the store. But you can also use mobile ads not only for user acquisition, but also to help build your brand. We encourage you to do both. And also the benefit primarily around that you can target your campaigns by device, by demographic, by interest, whatever that might be.

Now one tip I want to provide you though is your creative direction. You can't create a single piece of creative for all the channels that you're marketing through. So make sure that you create custom creative dependent upon that channel. We have heard from developers on Facebook, for example, it's better to use live action photos like you might see here for Hay Day.

That actually drives higher engagement for developers. But it's also important that you test. So I know some developers that will create upwards of 50 pieces of creative for one campaign. They'll very quickly learn what works best and what doesn't and continue to invest in that creative that does work.

And now my last point and my last channel I want to share with you is television. I understand this might be out of the budget of many of you, but I'm seeing some great TV campaigns around the globe, a lot of them here in Europe as well. And what makes television work so well is the fact that while people are watching TV, their devices are at hand. Either their iPhone is in their pocket, their iPad is on their lap, and if the television commercial is engaging enough, you will see them convert and you'll actually see results in near real time.

But it's important that you share the magic moments of your game to make sure that it's engaging and you get people to convert. You want to support it with a strong voiceover, maybe talking about the key features, the devices. But of course, you're going to want to have a clear call to action.

One way to create a clear call to action is by having a strong end frame. By that strong end frame, what I mean is that the last three or four seconds of a TV spot, make sure you have the App Store badge, but use your vanity URL. I should have mentioned this earlier. Your vanity URL is something that every one of you in this audience have.

You have your own appstore.com URL, which would be appstore.com slash your app name or appstore.com slash your developer name. And by using that in offline media, such as TV or print or billboard or what have you, it's a URL that your customers could easily remember and then go convert and get them to activate against.

So the TV spot I'm going to share with you is from Wooga for their new Jelly Splash game, or for the Jelly Splash game. And they've done a great job of capturing all these tips here to produce a really great spot. Plus they've added a little bit of humor to it, which I think helps drive engagement as well.

Jelly Splash. The most addictive puzzle game ever. Search Jelly Splash now. The hit game played by millions. Download for free on iPhone and iPad. Play Jelly Splash today. So great example of the badge usage, great example of the vanity URL I mentioned earlier, all in all a great spot.

So I want to leave with you with an email address. This is appstoremarketing@apple.com. This gives you direct access to our global marketing team. If you have any questions about your marketing campaigns, your strategies, if you want to send us your assets for review, we would love to take a look at it. We will respond to you within five business days. So with that, I want to thank you, and I'm going to hand it over to Shannon Bruce to talk about iTunes Connect.

My name is Shannon Bruce and I work on the App Store operations team. You've been hearing some great tips on choosing the right business model and how to best market your app. And I'm going to talk some more about how you can execute on some of these things through iTunes Connect.

I know that all of you have at least one app on the App Store, so you should be very familiar with iTunes Connect. And it is the gateway to the App Store. It's the website you use to create and manage your apps, check your payments and sales reports, request your promo codes, and much more.

I'm going to cover three major topics today. First, I'll go over some recently launched and valuable features. Second, I'll talk about how you can execute on your plans to localize your app. And finally, I'll leave you with some tips and tricks to help manage your business more effectively. Let's start with our first feature, promo codes.

We provide you with 100 promo codes for your use and they're set up so that you can request them as you need them in any denomination. As Steve mentioned, we encourage you to reserve these codes for your media representatives and influencers who can try out your app before it's available to the general public and write about it to help you promote it.

Up until recently, you were only able to request promo codes in the ready for sale state, but I'm happy to announce that you can now request promo codes in the pending developer release state as well. This is really exciting because it allows you to request promo codes for your app updates in addition to your first version of the app so you can promote your new features as well.

The next feature I want to talk about is app transfer. This is a very exciting launch for us this year at WWDC, as it was a highly requested feature by you. And it's the ability to transfer the ownership of an app from one developer account to another. And what are some of the reasons you might use App Transfer? The App Store has been in business for five years now, and many of you have seen phenomenal success.

You may have had the opportunity to sell your app to another developer, or you may have acquired a great app from another developer. Or maybe you've registered multiple accounts with Apple and would like to consolidate those accounts to be managed as one. If you're in any of these situations, App Transfer is a great solution for you.

And what are the benefits? One of the greatest things about app transfer is that it is completely seamless to your customers. What that means is that customers can continue to use the app and new customers can continue to purchase the app while the transfer process is happening. And you get to retain all of your chart placement, your customer ratings and reviews, and the ability to update the app for your customers. And there are really just very minimal visible changes to the app on the store. The only thing that changes on the App Store is the seller name.

So let's walk through a flow to show you what this looks like. First, as the current owner, you'll log into iTunes Connect, select the app you wish to transfer, and enter in the new owner information. That's the Apple ID of the team agent and the team ID of the new owner.

Then Apple will draw up a contract agreement between you and the new owner, and the app will move into a substate called Pending App Transfer. If your app is ready for sale at this time, it remains on the store, as all of this is happening on the back end.

At the same time, the new owner will receive an email letting them know that a transfer is waiting their acceptance. They'll log into iTunes Connect and they'll be required to enter in some new app metadata. I'll go into detail about what this is in a minute. They will also sign the same contract agreement and once both developers have signed the contract, the app moves into processing app transfer where it's moving from one account to the next.

There are some rules regarding app transfer, and I want to go over just a few of them that you should know about before transferring an app. You'll want to make sure you've agreed to any available contract amendments. From time to time, Apple updates the terms of the program license agreement or the paid apps contract.

And we just want to make sure that you've agreed to these terms before transferring an app. You also need to have at least one approved version for your app, and you won't be able to transfer an app that is currently in review. This includes in-app purchase reviews as well.

So as the current owner, what are some things you should have ready before initiating a transfer? You'll need to collect the new owner information, that is the Apple ID of the team agent. This isn't their password, just the username they use to log into iTunes Connect. And the team ID. The team ID is a unique identifier for your developer account, and you can find this ID in the member center.

We also encourage you to back up your app history. Once the app is transferred, it's completely gone out of your iTunes Connect account, so you won't have access to any of its current data. So if you want to request a catalog report or just have this information for your own records, you should do this before initiating the transfer.

And you'll need to arrange the actual transfer of the source code and binary of the app with the new owner. Because the only thing that the transfer process does is transfer the data to the new owner. So then once the transfer has been initiated, the app is under metadata lockdown. What this means is that you can still make changes to the pricing and availability of the app, but you will be locked out of making changes to anything else.

And the recipient has 60 days in order to accept the transfer. If they do not accept within the 60-day period, it will automatically be canceled. So then as the new owner, what are some things you should have ready before accepting an app transfer? You'll want to have that new app metadata that I mentioned earlier.

Since the ownership of the app is changing, we're under the assumption that the contact information is changing as well. So we require that you enter in the support URL and marketing URL for your app so that we can ensure that customers are directed to the correct place as the ownership changes.

This includes your app review contact information as well. This information is important so that if any questions or issues arise during the review of your app, we have a way of contacting you. And if the app contains encryption, the previous owner may have supplied export compliance documentation and you'll want to have this documentation ready as well. Many of you who acquire an app like to submit an update in order to make any changes to the branding information within the app. And we encourage you to have this update ready so that you can submit it as soon as the transfer is complete.

Then when the app moves into the processing app transfer state, the transfer has begun and the pricing is locked down in addition to the metadata. This should only take about 30 minutes, so you shouldn't be locked out for too long, but the transfer cannot be canceled at this time. It's literally when the app is moving from the current owner to the new owner.

So just to show you what this looks like on the App Store, Angry Birds was one of our first apps to be transferred. And you can see that the only thing that changes on the App Store is the seller name from Chilingo to Rovio. So that's app transfer.

The next feature I want to cover is alternate price tiers. We recently introduced some additional tiers for your use. These tiers are available for developers globally who wish to vary pricing in different currencies. And they just give you a little more flexibility to price your app thoughtfully and competitively.

There are five additional tiers for your use. They are completely market optimized, which means that they're culturally relevant and consumer friendly to the regions using those currencies. And there are no restrictions, meaning you can choose these for any of your apps or in-app purchases. And the great thing about the App Store being on the agency model means that you can change your pricing at any time.

These new tiers also map to existing apps. So one thing to note is that we only support the selection of these tiers through iTunes Connect. We don't support the assignment of these tiers through any other delivery method such as the import from file functionality in Application Loader or the XML feed with Transporter. But I do want to point out where you can select these tiers in iTunes Connect. This is the rights and pricing page of the app. And you can see that the alternate tiers are listed down at the bottom of the price tier. list.

Just to illustrate what this looks like, we'll use an example of an app priced at tier one, which is 99 cents in the US dollar and 69 pence in the British pound. However, if you were to select alternate tier one, the price remains 99 cents in the US dollar, but is now 99 pence in the British pound. And 99 pence is just a more culturally relevant price point. While it might be slightly higher for the customer, it's just another option for you to be able to price your app competitively.

And a few other examples. Tier 1 in the Euro is 89 Euro and alternate Tier 1 is 99 Euro. And for the Chinese RMB, 6 RMB for Tier 1 and 8 RMB for Tier 2. So we encourage you to check out these new tiers and just see what works for your app and your business model.

The last feature I want to talk about is automation. We know that your time as a developer is very valuable. And we do all that we can to save you time, especially when it comes to repetitive actions with iTunes Connect. So I want to talk about two areas of automation that I think will be very helpful with saving you time.

The first area of automation is auto-ingesting your reports from iTunes Connect. We provide you with a command line tool that allows you to automate the delivery of your reports from iTunes Connect. This has been available for your sales and trends reports, but we recently expanded it to include the delivery of your payment reports as well. And it just allows you to access your reports without actually having to log into the iTunes Connect interface each time.

In order to use this tool, you first have to download the auto ingestion class file at the URL here. And you'll need to change your directory level to point to the class file. And you'll also need to create a properties file for your login credentials. That is your iTunes Connect Apple ID and your iTunes Connect password. The great thing about this properties file is that it just puts a little more security around your login credentials as you used to enter this information directly into the command line. So it just allows your username and password to be a little bit more secure.

And I'll walk through what this command line looks like for each of the reports so you know how to do this for your own account. This is the command for the sales report. And all of the information in the angle brackets will be your own values. And the parameters will be delimited with a space. So you'll first start by entering in your vendor ID. And your vendor ID is another unique identifier for your developer account. This identifier can be found in the Contracts, Tax, and Making module.

Then you'll enter in the report type, which is sales for the standard sales report. Or if you have any newsstand apps and wish to download the newsstand report, you can enter newsstand. Then you'll indicate the date type, which is the daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly interval. And the report subtype will be summary for the standard sales report, detailed for the newsstand report, or if you're using auto-renewable subscriptions, you may be collecting personal information from customers who've chosen to share this information with you, and you can download that report using opt-in. Finally, the date range is optional, and this is the exact date for the report you wish to download. If you don't include a date, we'll just provide you with the latest available report based on the parameters you've indicated.

Similarly, this is the command for the payment reports. And you'll again start by entering in your vendor ID. But for the payment reports, you need to include two leading zeros in front of your vendor ID. Since the payment reports are broken out by currency, you'll then indicate a region code. And a list of the available region codes is available in the Payments and Financial Reports User Guide in iTunes Connect, if you need to access that.

The report type is always going to be DRR, which is the standard report type for the payment reports. And finally, you'll enter in the fiscal year and fiscal period. And if you need to access a copy of Apple's fiscal calendar, there is one available in the Payments and Financial Reports module in iTunes Connect.

So that's auto-ingesting your reports. And the second area of automation I want to cover is Apple's command line tool called Transporter. Transporter allows you to deliver your app metadata based on our XML specifications. You can integrate Transporter with your own content management system if you have one. And we recently introduced the ability to deliver your rights and pricing changes through iTunes Connect through Transporter. You can request catalog reports. And you can deliver your app metadata through Transporter, which can be extremely helpful when localizing your app.

This brings me to the next topic of localization setup. You've been hearing a lot about how you should think global and be local. And Alex and Steve have talked about how important App Store localization can be for providing your customers with the best customer experience. We highly recommend it.

We've talked about how the App Store is available in 155 territories, and we offer you 28 languages to set up for localization. We highly encourage you to use professional localization resources. Alex mentioned this resource earlier. And we advise against using automated translation services you might find on the web, as they might translate your content but don't fully localize it to be culturally relevant.

We also encourage you to localize anywhere possible. Alex showed a great example of Where Is My Water? and they localized everything including their screenshots. We know that there's a lot of fields in iTunes Connect that you can localize, which is why the XML feed can be very helpful.

One last thing I want to talk about regarding localization setup is that you are required to submit your app for review when you do add new localizations. So just make sure you leave enough time for the review process when you wish to add new localizations. And for those of you who wish to cut down on the repetitive actions that localizing can bring, we encourage you to adopt the automated process of the XML feed. And the steps for using the XML feed are fairly simple. You can start by looking up your existing metadata from the Apple database, which will provide you with your current app metadata in the exact format that it'll need to be uploaded.

From there, you can make any edits that you wish to make. And once you've made your changes, you can run Transporter in verify mode, which allows you to check your changes against our XML specifications. Then, you can upload your information so that it's ready to submit with your next update. You will still need to create your new app versions in iTunes Connect and you'll want to monitor your state transitions through iTunes Connect as well.

And I'm not going to go over a demo, but I do want to point out that there are a number of resources available to you within the Manage Your Apps module of iTunes Connect. And there's also a great session video from this year's WWDC called What's New in iTunes Connect. They talk in a little bit more detail about the XML feed, and they do a full end-to-end demo of what this looks like. So if you're interested in checking out this video, you can access it from the developer portal.

And we know that once you set up your localizations, you like to see what it looks like for your customer on the App Store. This is the Pages app, and just to show you what some of this looks like, one thing that we get a lot of questions about is the list of languages that appears in the app information section on the app page. This list of languages is not the languages that you've set up in iTunes Connect. This list comes from the lproj folder in your binary, and is meant to be the list of languages that your app is localized into once the customer has downloaded it.

The languages that you've set up in iTunes Connect will automatically be displayed on the App Store based on the customer's OS and storefront. So all you have to do is provide the content in iTunes Connect and the localizations will automatically display here. And just to show you a few other examples, you can see how your localizations look on the store by changing your OS and you can see what it looks like.

So finally, I'd like to leave you with some tips and tricks that you can take away today. Tip number one is viewing your App Store localizations on the device. We just saw what this looks like on the desktop, but it can be a little bit trickier to view your localizations on the device. And we get a lot of questions about this, so I wanted to walk you through how you could do that.

You'll start by entering multitasking mode in order to quit out of the App Store. Then you'll go to your settings and tap General International. Then tap Language. And from here, you can select the iOS language that you wish to view. For this example, I'm going to choose Chinese.

So tap the language and then tap Done. From there, you'll go back to the App Store. And if you're logged into your personal iTunes account, you'll need to sign out. Then you'll tap the Sign In button. Here you can see that the language has started to change to Chinese. And I don't personally speak Chinese, but I know that the third line here indicates the option to create a new Apple ID. And this is where the trick comes in. You don't actually have to create a new Apple ID, but you will start walking through the flow.

So tap Create New Apple ID. And then you'll be prompted to indicate a storefront. This is where you can select the storefront you wish to view. So tap Store. And for this example, I'll choose China. And then at this point, you can tap Cancel to exit out of the flow.

Once you exit out of the flow, the storefront will automatically change to the territory you've selected. So now that we have our iOS language set to Chinese and our storefront set to China, if we search for the Pages app, we can now see the Chinese localization as it would appear for the customer.

Tip number two is regarding tracking your customer reviews. Alex talked about how great this can be for your business and that your customers leave some great feedback. While you can do this on the App Store, we also encourage you to do this through iTunes Connect. You can access this page from the app summary page.

And the great thing about tracking your reviews through iTunes Connect is that you can easily toggle between the different territories since your customer reviews are specific to each territory. And you can access and subscribe to an RSS feed, which allows you to get instant feedback when customers post new reviews. Finally, tip number three is our advice for scheduling a sale.

Since the App Store is a global marketplace, we operate on many international time zones across the world. And what that means is that pricing or availability change will go live at different times in different countries on different time zones across the world. And it's what we call a rolling price and availability setting. Because the change begins propagating in one area and then rolls across the globe over a period of time.

So to illustrate what this looks like, we'll take a look at a map and we'll use a price change as our example. So if I have a paid app and I want to run a 24-hour sale where customers can download my app for free, the price will begin to be free in the New Zealand and South Pacific region, followed by the Asia Pacific region, then Australia, Russia, India, and the Middle East.

Next, Africa, Europe, and Latin America. And finally, the price will drop to free in North America. And because of this rolling schedule, what we recommend is that if you wish to run a 24-hour sale, that you actually set it up for three full days in iTunes Connect. So this is what it would look like. You can see that I've set the sale to begin on the 10th and end on the 13th.

And that concludes our session for today. I want to thank you for your time. And here are a list of some of the resources that were mentioned today. If you have any questions about marketing or distribution, please come visit us in the lab. And we're going to take a short break. And in about five minutes or so, we'll start again with a session on SpriteKit.
