---
Title:  App Store Distribution and Marketing for Apps
Year:   2013
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/tech-talks/2013-14/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Good afternoon, everyone. My name is Alex Rofman. I hope everyone's having a great day today. I manage a team of people back in Cupertino whose responsibility it is to help you as developers be successful on the App Store. So I'll kick off our lunchtime session today with some tips and tricks to help you do so.

And then I'll pass it off to my colleague, Steve McGuigan, who will talk to you about marketing your apps. And then our colleague, Shannon Bruce, will conclude the session with some tips and tricks on iTunes Connect. So let's get started. First thing I want to cover is a quick business update.

2013 has been a tremendous year for the App Store. In May, the 50 billionth app was downloaded. And then October, just a short while ago at our iPad event, we announced that our 60 billionth app has been downloaded, nearly half of which happened in the prior 12 months. So there's tremendous momentum behind the App Store business.

In June, at our annual developers conference, we announced that $10 billion had been paid out to developers. And then again, at our iPad event in October, we announced that that total had grown to $13 billion. And this is probably the statistic we're most proud of for a number of reasons. First, none of the competitive platforms out there have announced a single figure about how much you as developers are making distributing your apps on their platforms. So this is something that we're extremely proud of, as I said. and we hope you are as well.

And then lastly, the App Store celebrated its fifth birthday in July. I joined the team in July of 2009. That was 59 billion downloads ago and billions and billions of dollars ago. It's really incredible to think that this business is only five years old and we hope you're as excited as we are about what the next five years might bring.

The App Store has more than 575 million accounts, most of which are tied to credit cards. This offers you unprecedented opportunity to acquire customers from around the world. The catalog, we're proud to say, now stands at more than one million apps with thousands more added on a weekly basis.

475,000 of those apps are made for the beautiful larger palette of the iPad. Taking a look at the App Store catalog by content type, you see that 54% of apps available are iPhone only, 13% of apps available are iPad only, and 33% are universal apps, where one download works on all of a customer's devices.

The catalog is tremendously active with more than 90% of all apps available being downloaded on a monthly basis. And there's tremendous velocity in this business with more than 800 apps downloaded per second. That means at the end of our 90 minute session here, nearly four and a half million apps will have been downloaded from the App Store. Tremendous, tremendous velocity. So that's the business update. The next thing I'd like to cover is an overview of the App Store so that everybody understands how the business is structured and managed.

First, the App Store is a global business. We're in 155 countries around the world, but this is not just about a distribution footprint. This is also about a revenue opportunity. 61% of Apple's revenue comes from outside the United States, and this is a vastly different percentage than from when before the App Store launched.

We have hand-curated stores across the world that accept local currency and are programmed in the local language. Here's our North and South American stores. There's an additional grouping of Latin American countries. Here's our stores in Europe. There's also a grouping here of additional European countries. And lastly, our stores in the Asia Pacific region, and there's a grouping there that covers additional Asian countries.

And our mission as a global team is to help our customers. And our mission as a global team is to help our customers find great apps. And this is a mission that we feel grows in importance as the catalog grows and as the number of customers in the App Store grows. And as I said, the way we do that is by hand-curating the App Store.

Here's a couple pages from the App Store. On the left, you see the featured page. On the center, you see the recently launched kids category page, which is one of 24 categories in the App Store, many of which are hand-curated around the world. And on the right, you see the design for iOS 7 collection.

And on the left, you see the latest version of iOS 7 collection, which is one of dozens and dozens of thematic or seasonal collections that have all the apps that you might need for a particular topic. On the iPad, the same curation, just more real estate for more great apps.

On a weekly basis, our editors around the world are choosing the best apps and the best games and denoting them as editor's choice. Here's a couple recent selections. And the last bit about curation that I'd like to cover is our weekly free app of the week program. Every week, a well-localized, paid, universal app is made available for free for our customers to download all over the world. Apple waves its royalties for this program. The developer waves their royalties for this program. And our customers have shown they absolutely love getting free access to a great piece of paid content.

Here's three additional screenshots from the App Store. A charts page on the left, the recently launched popular Near Me page in the center, and a search results page on the right. These pages are not curated on the App Store. The business has been around for five years and we work with thousands and thousands of developers and not a week goes by that we don't get the question from a developer, how do I improve the placement of my app in search results or how do I get my app to show up in the popular Near Me page. Well, while keywords can have an influence in where your app shows up in search results, the most important thing that you as a developer can do is build a great app that our customers love and the algorithms will take care of the rest.

So I want to conclude this part of my presentation with an overview of the App Store editorial process. First and foremost, our selections are based on quality and quality alone. We do not accept money for paid placement in the App Store. We've never accepted a single penny and we have no plans to do so.

The process of choosing apps to feature is separate from the app review process. Apps are approved or rejected based on their adherence to our publicly available App Store review guidelines. Just because your app is approved, however, does not mean that your app will be featured. We consider apps from all 24 categories with a particular focus on new apps or evergreen apps with significant updates. And then lastly, while newly approved apps are added to the store on a continual basis, new featured content is published by our team on a weekly basis, typically Thursdays Pacific time. So that's the App Store overview.

The next thing I'd like to dig into are some best practices to help you be successful. And the first one we'll talk about is your App Store presence. This is your app name, your icon, your screenshots, your description, and your keywords. These are things that if you're heads down in development are very easy to overlook, but they're not difficult to do well with a little time and attention.

So to help explain what I mean here, let's use the popular music identification app Shazam as an example. First, the name Shazam. It's unique, it's short, it's memorable, and there's no keywords or descriptives attached to their name. And the icon, it's beautifully designed and instantly recognizable by a user on their home screen.

Next, let's take a look at Shazam's current screenshots in the App Store. Your screenshot should tell a story and you should avoid distracting graphics or text overlaid on top of your screenshots because your App Store presence is in many ways your first introduction to our customers of your brand and your product. So Shazam, their first screenshot. Identify music in as little as one second. It's very clear, it's very concise, and it gives the core function. It explains the core function of your app. It's the core function of the Shazam app to customers.

The next screenshot shows you what a song looks like after it's been identified. You see the artist name, you see the track title, you see the artwork, and you see a download on iTunes link. The last two screenshots for Shazam point out important features of the app. The explore screenshot with the thumbnails overlaid on top of the map indicate that users can find popular tracks by region, and on the right, real-time top tracks indicate that users can find popular tracks by region. It's self-explanatory. Explain to the user that they can discover tracks popular across the entire Shazam system.

So next, let's take a look at Shazam's app description. Shazam recognizes music and media playing around you. Tap the Shazam button to instantly match and then explore, buy, and share. You can Shazam as much as you want. So this is taken from Shazam's product page in the App Store. And you can see it's optimized for device, where our customers shop.

App Store customers are not shopping on the desktop. They're shopping on the iPhone, the iPod Touch, or the iPad. And it's clear and concise. They avoided listing all the accolades that their app has received. And they take advantage of those first three or four lines to explain in simple terms what their app does.

Next, let's take a look at some keywords. I can't share with you exactly what Shazam's keywords are because they're confidential, but let's look at some sample keywords for a music app to help you understand the difference between bad keywords and good ones. So, music, music discovery, track, song, album, albums, and iTunes. These are not very good keywords. So, first, music.

If you don't need the category name that your app resides in as a keyword. Next, you see album and albums are repeated. Our system handles plural. So, by inputting album as a keyword, we would cover albums. And then iTunes is not a good keyword for Shazam because it's only okay to use the name of a third party in your keywords if your app uses an API provided by that third party.

So here's a much stronger set of keywords for a music app. Artist, album, song, track, discovery, new, streaming, and lyrics. So that's your App Store presence. Your name, your icon, your screenshots, your description, and your keywords. Again, these are not things that are hard to do well. You just need to give them a little time and attention.

So next, business model. How do you choose the right business model for your app? The first thing I want to talk about is build a universal app. And I can imagine that you might be questioning, well, isn't this a product decision? How is this a business decision? Well, it's absolutely a business decision for a number of reasons. First, our customers love the convenience of being able to download one binary that works on all of their devices, as shown in this animation here.

And looking back at the pie chart, breaking down the App Store catalog by content type, while we see growth in all of the key metrics, catalog size, downloads and sales for iPhone apps, iPad apps and universal apps, by far we see the highest growth for universal apps. And the data shows that customers are not inclined to purchase two separate versions of the same product.

So next, choosing the right business model for your product. So there's not a single prescription that I can stand up here and say that applies to everybody in this room, every product that you're building. But I want to leave you with some key takeaways that will help you make a good decision.

So here are three of the potential business models available to you in the App Store. On the left you see free apps, which are typically ad supported or support external services like brick and mortar stores. We see a lot of developers taking their ad supported app and adding a remove ads in app item. And the key takeaway here is that does not make your app a freemium business model. I'll spend some time talking about freemium in just a few minutes, but just keep that in mind. Next we have traditional paid apps.

There's a lot of chatter in the blogosphere these days that the market for paid apps on the App Store is dead. And I can tell you as someone who looks at this data every single day, that's completely not true. Paid apps still represent a very significant portion of the App Store business. There's no shortage of customers who are willing to pay for the premium experience and actually prefer the premium experience where they, for a single purchase price, they get your entire app's features and content.

And then lastly we have what we call Paymium. Paymium is a model where the parent app is paid and there are in-app skews for additional features, content, services that give you an opportunity for ongoing monetization after that initial purchase. Paymium is an excellent model, especially for those developers who've been asking for a path to paid upgrades from the App Store.

So next I want to spend some time talking about freemium. Freemium is a big buzzword in the App Store world these days. Lots of press written about it. And I want to give you some key takeaways to make sure you make the right decision if freemium is the model that you're going to pursue.

So let's start with the definition. Freemium is a business model where a product or service is provided for free, but money is charged for advanced features, functionality, or virtual goods. So to my point about a remove ads in app skew in your free app, that would not classify as a freemium app.

Freemium is a model that's been used by a lot of developers who've seen success with it from media distribution apps, newsstand apps, social and dating apps, and business productivity and finance apps like the ones you see here. But there's no pot of gold at the end of the freemium rainbow. It is not the right model for every product in the App Store. And if you look at the breakdown of the catalog by business model, you can see that nearly 90% of apps available in the store are free.

And if you look at the breakdown of the catalog by business model, you can see that nearly 90% of apps available in the App Store have a business model that is not freemium. And I'm sure many of you spend a lot of time in the App Store and you see, particularly on the top grossing charts, there are a lot of freemium games in particular on the top grossing charts.

But what you don't see are all the well-made, highly rated products that chose the wrong business model, freemium in particular, and never made it to the charts. So my goal here, again, is to help you make the right decision for your product. And we've come up with a free, framework that involves three questions that you should consider as you assess whether freemium is right for you. So first, what are your target market's expectations?

What I mean by this is don't try to fit a square peg into a round hole from a business model perspective. Don't have a business model that's inconsistent with what your target market might expect. So let's take an aviation app, for example. If you're building an app to replace the heavy briefcases, that pilots have been carrying onto planes for decades, the pilot's expectation is that they're not going to be prompted to pay for every different route or every different emergency procedure or every time there's an update to the content. The expectation of a pilot for that type of app is they'll pay one price and they will get full access to all of the content, features, and services in that app.

In contrast, if you're building a cloud storage app, there is a target market expectation for users of cloud storage services that some amount of storage and some basic set of features will be available for free. And if you use that storage up or you want more comprehensive features, you'll be prompted to pay. So there is a freemium model does fit with the expectations of users of cloud storage services.

So as we walk through this framework, I want to also walk through the funnel, the download funnel for freemium apps. So at the top of the funnel, you have downloads. Being free will not make everybody in the world, every single app store customer, download your app. But it may expand your reach within your target market.

The second piece of the framework is, can you segment the experience between free and paid? If as a developer, you say, you know what, I don't care about free users. I only want paid users. That's completely fine. That might be the right decision for your business. But if that's the case, 100% do not choose freemium as your model. Because the most successful freemium products in the App Store are providing a tremendous amount of value to both free and paid users.

And the reason why is that the path to monetization in freemium is through engagement. And that means if the first time a user launches your app, the first thing that they see is your in-app store prompting them to pay, they're going to delete your app and move on to something else. You're not doing yourself any service at all by doing that. You need to give users a chance to get engaged. And the way to do that in a freemium product is by providing them value for free.

Which brings us to the next part of the funnel, which are your retained users. Obviously, this is a smaller percentage than the number of users that download your app initially. And then the last piece of the framework is do you have a plan to create lasting value? Again, the most successful freemium products in the store are providing long-term value to their users via the inherent qualities of the app themselves and as a developer through a long-term roadmap to add features, content, or services. So if you've built something that is only for periodic or one-time use, chances are freemium is not the right model for you.

Which again brings us to the last piece of the funnel, conversion. The number of your retained users that you convert. And the math really is crucial to whether you can be successful in freemium. If you're building a niche product, for example, that does not have a chance to be downloaded millions and millions of times, you might see higher retention and conversion and a higher average spend and the math can work out.

In contrast, if you're building a product that has potential to reach millions and millions of people, you might see a lower conversion and a lower average spend, but the math can still work out for you because the numbers are so big. So do the math. It's important and will help you determine whether freemium is the right model for you. So you've gone through the framework, you've done the math, and you've decided, yes, freemium is the right model for you. So what are the next steps?

So a lot of this is just reiterating what I've said earlier. First, identify and focus on the product that you're building. Second, identify and focus on your target market. Again, being free will not make everyone interested in your app, but it may expand your reach within your target market. And make sure your business model is consistent with what your target market might expect.

Next, prioritize engagement before monetization. This speaks for itself. Happy customers are the ones that are likely to pay. And if you have a paywall that a user sees within a few seconds after launching your app, you're not giving them a chance to get it. So you're going to have to be very careful.

And if you have a paywall that a user sees within a few seconds after launching your app, you're not giving them a chance to get it. get happy and start getting some value out of your app. Next, incorporate the business model into the very early stages of your product design.

If you've built something great and beautiful without any regard to the business model, and at the 11th hour you decide, oh, this should be freemium, and you put a paywall up, chances are that's not going to feel native or natural to the users. And again, they're not going to get engaged and you're not going to give yourselves a chance to monetize that user in the long run.

So consider the business model from the very early stages of your product design. Next, track your metrics, as I said earlier. If freemium is not working for you, don't be afraid to change the model. Or if freemium is the right model but the economy isn't quite right, don't be afraid to tune your economy after you've launched.

[ Transcript missing ]

So that's my discussion on freemium. Next we'll talk a little bit about pricing. So the App Store runs under the agency model. That means you as developers have full control over what the price of your product is. And the guidance we have is two-fold. Be thoughtful. Take a look at the competition. The App Store is a very, very competitive space.

There are lots of apps that do very, very similar things. And your pricing should be in line with what your competition charges. And then the key takeaway that I want to leave you with is that you should be in line with what your competition charges. The only two successful price points in the App Store are free and 99 cents. And that's just not true at all. Many, many developers are seeing success at higher price points in the App Store.

Consider price promotions. These are sales. Don't do sales all the time. If you do that, customers will not be inclined to buy your app. They'll just be waiting until the price gets lowered. But well-timed price promotions are a great way to grow your business on the App Store.

[ Transcript missing ]

And then lastly, don't plan on being featured by the App Store as your marketing plan. There are a lot of things that you can do within your control to generate momentum for your app in the App Store. And my colleague Steve will talk about that momentarily. So you've launched your app. Now what?

Well, first and foremost, monitor the ratings and reviews. We have extremely vocal customers in the App Store. They'll tell you what you're doing well. They'll tell you what you're not doing well. You may discover some bugs and you might get some good ideas for a future update. So this might be a little bit hard for some of you to read, but this is a well-rated cooking app.

And this reviewer says that the app is very well done, but it's not useful for American cooks because it's only in the metric system. So through this review, there's a great, easy-to-implement idea for a future update to this app. Add the imperial measurement system so that it becomes a useful product for the American market.

Next, update your apps. Launching it and leaving it is not a strategy for success in the App Store. The market is too competitive. Here's some real data from Evernote, a popular productivity app, and each orange star indicates a significant update that Evernote has made to their product. They've had great momentum since they launched on the App Store and the additional investment that they make in their product has helped to build on that momentum. Test your apps thoroughly so you can avoid constant bug fixes. The right timing for feature-rich or content-rich updates is roughly every four to six weeks.

Next, use push notifications and sharing. Push notifications are a tremendous way to bring people back to your app. Avoid using them in ways that customers may perceive as spam or marketing, but well-timed, well-written push notifications are very effective to get people engaged with your app. And then on the right, use our share sheets. If people love using your app, make it easy for them to tell others about it as well.

Next, monitor your sales and trends. This might seem obvious, but you'd be surprised at how many people aren't doing this. There's a wealth of data available to you in iTunes Connect, and there's a vibrant third-party ecosystem of services whose sole existence is to help you optimize your business on the App Store.

In particular, you might find out by monitoring your data that your app is doing well in a market that you had no idea that it was doing well in, and there's a path for a future update by adding a localization for that particular market. So that's my discussion on best practices. Next thing we'll talk about is localization.

[ Transcript missing ]

So what should you localize? Your app name, your app description, your screenshots, and all of the contents of your app. Recommended languages. So if you have a product, not every product is globally relevant, but if you have a product that has a chance for that global relevancy, this is the group of languages we recommend you start with. English, French, Italian, German, and Spanish.

The Asian languages, Korean, Japanese, traditional and simplified Chinese, and then Brazilian, Portuguese, Russian, Turkish, and Arabic. This list is not prioritized. It's not in alphabetical order. It's just the set of languages you should start with if your product has global relevancy. So it's all well and good for me to stand up here and tell you to localize that this is a global business and you're missing out on dollars to be made by not localizing.

I imagine you guys want some proof that this actually makes a difference. Well, today's your lucky day. I do have some proof. This is one of thousands and thousands of examples I could have shown you from the App Store. I'm going to show you a little bit of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results.

So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. So this is a little bit of a preview of the results. that show that localizing your app makes a difference in local markets.

And let's take a look at the charts. Here's some recent charts from China, Japan, and France. With all but two exceptions here, Clash of Clans and Angry Birds Star Wars that have gone the branding route with their app name, every single app at the top of the charts here is localized. And on top of that, our editors in local markets around the world have an extremely strong preference for promoting and featuring apps in the local language.

So again, think globally, but be local. And Apple provides a number of resources to help you to do so. There's the URL at the top. On this page, you'll find some tips and tricks for localizing, as well as a list of third-party localization vendors, assuming you don't have the linguistic expertise in-house to localize into dozens of languages. So that's my discussion on localization. Last but not least, and this is more or less a summary of everything I've talked about today, how do you get featured in the App Store?

First and foremost, build something great, build something unique that our customers love. Next, have a strong App Store presence. These things matter. When we feature an app, we're putting our stamp of approval on it and we want everything, not just the app itself, to look good and send a strong and clear message to our customers.

Choose the right business model and price thoughtfully. Don't choose a business model or a price that's out of line with a competitive marketplace for apps that you're competing with. Offer your customers a universal binary. Again, we've sold a lot of iPads and unless you're building something that really is iPhone specific only, like a running app or a jogging app, we strongly encourage you to build a universal app. Localize in relevant markets.

And then lastly, let us know about it. It always helps to hear from the developer what you've built and why you're proud of it and why you think we should let our customers know. So that's my discussion. Thank you very much. Now I'll turn it over to my colleague Steve McGuigan who will talk about App Store marketing. Steve McGuigan Thank you, Alex, and good afternoon. My name is Steve McGuigan and I'm the head of marketing for the App Store.

And you know, at Apple, we spend a lot of time thinking about apps. And we think about the channels that we can market them through. And it varies from television to print You'll see apps being marketed through billboards throughout cities, on bus stops. You'll see them marketed through our over 400 retail locations around the globe and our thousands of channel partners. We spend a lot of energy marketing apps on Apple.com or through the hundreds of millions of emails that we send on a monthly basis, as well as through social media, where we speak to nearly 11 million fans and followers on Facebook and Twitter on a daily basis.

But as Alex mentioned earlier, you control much of your success on the App Store. Your success is not dependent upon getting featured, but of course it needs to start with a great app, which you've been learning about how to build today, but that success will be propelled by having a great marketing plan. And that's what I'm here to talk to you about today.

I'm going to begin by talking about three programs that we've created to help you not only monetize, but to help you promote your app. I'll share with you some of the resources we built to help you make great marketing campaigns. And then I'll conclude by talking about the components that make up a comprehensive marketing campaign.

So let's begin with the programs and resources. Now I've been hearing for quite a while that developers have been asking for a method to give away their paid apps for free without making their apps freely available to everybody in the App Store. So I'm pleased to announce the new App Store Code program.

The App Store Code Program provides you, the developer, the ability to market free offers to customers using unique 12-digit codes. Currently, the program is focused on offering paid apps downloaded for free. Now these codes are different than the promo codes that you can request out of iTunes Connect. Those, which we'll talk about later, should be used for PR.

These codes should be used for high volume marketing campaigns. It's a completely free program. You as a developer will waive your 70% royalty and we as Apple will waive our 30% commission. And when you receive these codes, you can distribute them digitally or physically. I'll give you some examples of this in a moment.

So what are the benefits of such a program? Well, first, this will allow you to create an impactful and a high value marketing promotion that's going to aid in not only user acquisition, but also engagement. The fact that these codes are integrated into iOS, it will create a simple, frictionless, and a consistent user experience for those redeemers.

So let me give you an example of what one of these promotions could look like. And this is a test we did with Big Fish Games where they wanted to distribute this offer digitally. Big Fish Games has a popular game called Fairway Solitaire, and they wanted to target game enthusiasts and golf enthusiasts, so they went after a few popular websites that addressed that market.

[ Transcript missing ]

So back to the redemption flow. The customer taps on Get It Free, at which point the App Store launches and the customer enters in their password for the App Store. And that 12-digit code is automatically populated in the redeem field. So all that the customer has to do is tap redeem and the app begins downloading and the offer is complete.

So that's an example of a digital distribution. But here's an example of a physical distribution. And this was great. Halfbrick came to us and they said, we want to celebrate the anniversary of Fruit Ninja, obviously a very popular game. And they wanted to do this by creating a public event with a really high quality. And what they came to us with is this idea of a kiosk. Where on this kiosk they had eight iPads around the four corners of it with a flat screen and customers could come up and play with Fruit Ninja.

Now they would create signage drawing people to this event. They would keep scores of the day trying to find who was the best Fruit Ninja master. Well, we love this so much. They loved it so much they created four of these kiosks and put them in public venues around Melbourne and Sydney and shopping malls and parks and what have you. And it created a ton of PR buzz and a lot of great engagement. Well, as people were playing Fruit Ninja, they were given this little business card size collateral that each card had its own unique 12-digit code on it.

On the back, it explained to go into the App Store and log in, type in that unique 12-digit code and tap redeem. And again, the offer is complete. So this is a really great example of a great physical campaign that drove live activation and Halfbrick really loved it. So if you have an idea for such a campaign, we do have some requirements. First, we're looking for you to create a high impact marketing campaign that's going to drive a high redemption opportunity. So somewhere in the neighborhood of 100,000 codes or more.

[ Transcript missing ]

We want you to track your distribution so we know how many codes you're putting through which channels. And then of course you'll need our approval. So in order to gain this approval, drop us an email at appstorecodes@apple.com and you'll receive a template back from us that will ask you to fill out describing your campaign and what you want to do.

Once you receive our approval, we'll send you an agreement. You guys sign the agreement, you send it back to us, and then we'll provide you the list of the unique 12-digit codes. What's great about this program is that you can track the performance of it on a daily basis through the sales and trends report you guys use today. So you'll know the effectiveness quite quickly of these campaigns. So that's the App Store code program. The second program is iAd.

iAd is Apple's digital advertising platform. We know you work very hard to create a beautiful app, and we don't want to see your experience degraded with a poor ad experience. And that's where iAd comes in. iAd is now available in 14 countries worldwide, where we just launched in three new countries this week in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Ireland.

Now, there's two aspects to iAd. There is the monetization side of iAd and there's the promotion side of iAd. So let me begin by talking about the monetization side. With iAd, you can monetize your app by serving up iAds within your app. By doing so, you'll receive a 70% revenue share for all the ads that you serve.

Now the iAd platform is both flexible and noncompetitive. And what I mean is that you can go out and sell your own ads to render in addition to those that are being presented with an iAd, but you also can block your competition from showing up in your app.

If you don't want certain apps to be marketed in your app or certain brands to be marketed, you have the ability to blacklist those. The ads that will be served to you, you can be assured that they will be compelling, rich media ads, as I said before, not to degrade your own app experience. And you can track the results in real time through iTunes Connect. You can look at the impressions being served, your clicks, and the revenue being generated. So that's the monetization side. But in order to get started here, there's only three things you need to do.

First, go into iTunes Connect and complete your iAd contract. Second, enable the iAd framework within your app. And then third, you just submit your app into the app review team. So let's move over to the promotion side and how you can use iAd to drive downloads of your app. And with that, you use iAd Workbench.

We announced iAd Workbench at WWDC this last summer, and it's your do-it-yourself campaign creation and management tool. When it was announced this summer, it was only available in the US, but as of this week, we now have iAd Workbench available in those same 14 countries. Again, there's now two sides of the iAd Workbench product. There's the campaign creation and there's the analytics. So let me explain to you quickly how to create a campaign within iAd Workbench. create a campaign within IAD Workbench.

There's only five steps. First, you need to select the app that you want to promote, which is your app. Second, you need to select your audience. Now for the non-marketers in the room, we make it very simple. You can select the automatic targeting and the integration that iAd has with the App Store, we will automatically find the best customers for you. Now for you marketers here in the room that want to do your own targeting, there's eight different criteria at which you can target your campaigns, whether it's gender or sex or city or interest with various categories within the App Store. A number of different criteria.

Next, you need to set your budget. Tell iAd how much you want to spend over how many days. And then upload your creative. Again, if you're not the creative type and you don't know how to create a great banner ad, we provide four templates that you can use. And there's various iterations of that with color and font that can make it look really unique to your own campaign. And then finally, submit it.

You'll get response within 24 hours whether or not your campaign's been approved and then you can begin to run it. Now, we provide a dashboard where you can get a macro view of your account. You can monitor your campaigns or initiate new ones. But you also can get detailed statistics of your campaign.

You can look at specific time periods and metrics such as your spend, your impressions, your downloads, your tap-through rates, your CPC, all this various stuff. And then you can also download these metrics as a CSV from any screen if you want to integrate it into your own analytics package. There was an entire hour-long session about iAd presented.

So, we have a lot of resources online. We have a lot of resources online at WWDC, which I don't have time to go through. But we have plenty of resources online. And in the lab next door, we have the iAd staff available to you so you can ask any questions about either getting set up or launching your own campaign.

So, that's iAd. Let me talk about the third program, which is our affiliate program. Now, our affiliate program allows you to earn a 7% commission when promoting content, whether it's your own apps, other apps, or other content we have in iTunes such as TV, movies, music, and books. But what many developers don't know is that you can use our affiliate program to track your marketing performance. I'll explain how to do that in the next slide. But along those lines, you have the ability to track the sales of both your paid and your free apps.

So we are just now launching a new program partner in PHG. So we'll have a single partner for over 100 countries around the globe. And one of the big benefits of this new partnership is that there's a new easy link structure. So gone are the days of that very long affiliate URL. You simply just take the URL of your app from the App Store and append your affiliate token that you receive once you're approved into the program. That's all you really need to do to begin generating that 7% commission.

But what I would love you guys to use is the new campaign tracking we have. And this will tell you a lot about your campaign performance. By appending the campaign token at the end of the URL, you have a 40-character string you can enter in. So whether you want to measure the performance of an email or measure the performance of a web campaign, whatever it is, you can append it to the end of that campaign and get those detailed statistics of how that campaign is doing. With this new partnership with PHG, we've now localized our resources into 24 languages, and you now can receive payment in the currency of your choice of over 100 different currencies.

Now the affiliate program offers a number of additional tools. We can create banners for any of the store content for you. We can create interactive widgets so your customers can search for content within the store. We provided a search API, RSS feeds, and even our enterprise partner feed, which allows you to download all the metadata for any bit of content we have in the store. So that's it for this episode of the App Store. Thanks for watching. We'll see you next time. Bye. That's the affiliate program. Next, I want to talk about the developer marketing resources we're providing you.

A simple way to get there is to go to appstore.com/marketing. Within there, we have the App Store marketing guidelines, high resolution assets of our device images and our badges for you to download, and then a link to a number of tools. So first, what is the App Store marketing guidelines? Well, we just revamped these, and this week we've now localized it into Spanish, Italian, German, and French.

Additionally, we've done simplified Chinese, traditional Chinese, and Japanese, and we're going to be launching some additional languages soon. But these guidelines were created to give you advice and direction on how best to market your apps using the assets that we're providing you. These assets include the App Store badges and our device images. So let me talk about both of those very briefly.

The first is the App Store badge. We now have a single App Store badge, which is downloaded on the App Store. And the App Store customer knows this as a call to action, that when they see it, that your app is live on the App Store and to use this to go download your app.

And we encourage you to use it in all of your marketing. But when you're doing so, place it in a subordinate position. The most important thing for you to do is to talk about your app. Lead with your app name. Talk about the features. Talk about the devices that it's on and can conclude with the App Store badge as that call to action. We've localized the badge now into 38 languages.

So as you follow Alex's advice and work on localizing your app, you now have the ability to create this call to action in all of your marketing around the globe. Now the Apple device images. We have now provided the white versions of the devices. So now you have black and white for both iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch.

And we encourage you to use it in all of your marketing. But when you're using this in your marketing, I encourage you, please use actual screenshots. Don't use iPad as a frame for your trailer, you know, unless you're a trailers app. But find the most inspiring screenshots that describe what your app is and place those in the device images.

And please do not cover up your beautiful apps with marketing violators such as download today or available now. Just really let the app speak for itself. Now if the creative direction you're going down doesn't allow for you to use the device images we provide, you have the full right to take your own photography and videography.

And we provided you some great tips and tricks on how to do that within the App Store marketing guidelines. So I'm going to conclude my talk this afternoon about the components of what makes up a comprehensive marketing campaign. Now there are a number of channels that I want you to consider in marketing your app. But I've bucketed them into two different buckets for you.

The first are owned channels. And in many cases, these are free channels to you. So independent of your marketing budget, you can be successful in these channels as long as you put enough energy and do some great work to support those. And I'll conclude by talking about some paid channels. So let's begin with social media. Now, through each of these channels, I'm going to provide you some real great tips to really help you be successful in these various areas.

But with social media, it should not be an afterthought. You need to think about how you're going to integrate social media into not only your app, but what your content strategy is going to be. So we'll start with the integration with your app. And Alex touched on this first earlier. Use the share sheet that we provide in iOS 7. That's probably the simplest way you can get people to share content from within your app on Facebook and Twitter.

But also think about how you can leverage the social media networks to drive content back to your app. And I really like what RunKeeper has done here. They give RunKeeper's customers, their friends, the ability to cheer them on as they're going for a run. By posting on Facebook or Twitter, you can hear that as you're going for your run to help motivate you as you run.

But then you need to think about your content strategy. As you build out your brand on social media, there's three things I want you to think about. First, remember, the content that you're putting out there is going to be nestled amongst the content of your customers' friends and family. So be conversational, be engaging, don't just continually try to sell, sell, sell. Make sure that your content would flow within the newsfeed of your customers. And then think about how you can get the customer to arrest the thumb.

We all do this. We go through our newsfeeds very, very quickly. But what is that bit of content? What is that copy? What is that photo that's going to grab somebody's attention? And when you see something like this from RunKeeper, you're thinking, why is there a heart on here? Well, you realize that you can go out there, this was celebrating a holiday, but the fact that you can go out there and run this route, I thought was a really engaging post.

And when you're looking for that engagement, you're trying to get your customers to share your content. You want to drive that virality. But what do people want to share? Well, they share what's inspirational to them or what's aspirational. So think about that copy that does both that, inspires and aspires.

So that's social media. Let's move forward to email. Email, in many cases, is the first time you're going to be communicating with your customer outside of the App Store. So think very hard about what that first communication is going to be. You don't want to offend them. You don't want them to think it's just a sales channel. You want them to keep you out of their spam folder. So that first email is extremely important. That second email, that third email, put together a strong email campaign.

and target your communications. There's two things you can do here. One, segment your subscriber base. Think about those emails you want to send about maybe account management separately from those about app updates depending on where you know your customer is in the life cycle of your app. But you also can target your communications by platform.

You know this is an iPhone or an iPad user, so speak to them as an iPhone or an iPad user. Alex Rofman Be useful. Don't continually try to sell. Think about the kind of content you can provide in an email that's going to want that person to engage. I love this one from Trippet because this is an email I definitely want. If my flight is going to be delayed, I want to know that.

Think about how you can support your social media strategy. Provide links in your emails allowing people to follow you on Facebook and Twitter or other networks. Optimize your email for the devices it's being viewed on. Don't try to cram that large desktop email into the small form factor in an iPhone. Use proper image sizes and font sizes. Next, let's talk about your website. I know you all have them, but we introduced a technology in iOS 6 called Smart App Banners.

I would love to see more of you take advantage of this. You simply have to add one line of code to your website. With that line of code, it will detect when customers are coming to you from an iOS device. When that happens, a banner ad is presented at the top of your page.

And the call to action varies depending upon where your customer is as far as their relationship with you. So in this case, if the customer does not have Sky Guide installed, the call to action says View in the upper right-hand corner. And when they tap on View, they're taken into the App Store to download your app. Now if the customer does have your app installed, it says Open. And when they tap on Open, it launches your app. It's important to optimize your website for the smaller form factor of the iPhone, again, by using the proper image sizes and font sizes.

And we encourage you to use multiple install points. Again, use the App Store badge as a call to action to get people to tap on it to download your app. Support that social media strategy by allowing people to follow you on social media. And then finally, include an FAQ and links to your customer care center so that customers can contact you if there's an issue rather than leaving you bad reviews on the App Store.

So the next channel is cross promotion. Now for you developers in the audience that have multiple apps on the App Store, you are at a severe advantage to those that don't because you already have an audience that you can speak to. But please, be thoughtful when you're cross promoting your apps.

The More Apps menu is a popular way of doing it, and I like how Yahoo has done this. By tapping on the hamburger menu, they are then presenting all the Yahoo apps, which then the customer can then tap on, and then they're taken directly into the App Store to download. It's a very thoughtful implementation.

We also see the use of tickers now. And this is an example with the Sims Free Play. This is not an intrusive ad in any way. The streaming ticker at the bottom is talking about FIFA 14, the benefits of it. You can tap on it and then you can be taken into the App Store to download that app.

[ Transcript missing ]

Now, if you do want to write a press release, make sure you can support and substantiate your claims and please send us your press release. We'd be happy to review it. If you send it to pressreleases at apple.com, we'll get to you within five business days and give you our thoughts on the press release.

So the last own channel that I want to talk about is trailers. And I got to tell you, I really like what I'm seeing with app trailers. They are really been taken to the next level with a really high production value. But because I'm seeing so many of them, it's really important that you follow a few tips and tricks.

The first thing is to think about those first six seconds of your trailer. You don't need to open your trailer with your company logo and your license source logo and various things. Get into the beauty of your app to get people to want to watch your videos. And then watch the rest of your trailer. Keep your trailer to about 30 to 60 seconds, because that's about all the time you have to keep somebody's attention span on a trailer.

And then use professional capturing tools. Gone are the days where your friend sits over your shoulder with a camcorder trying to watch you record your experience on the iPhone. Use digital capturing tools, and there's a number of really great ones out there in the market today. And support that capture with a great soundtrack. Whether it's music or a voiceover, that is really going to add a lot to your trailer. You're going to want to provide a clear call to action. And then finally, ensure that your trailer is globally appropriate.

And there's two aspects of this. First is price. If you market the app here and saying that it's in so many euros or what have you, that doesn't mean a lot to an American or somebody in Japan or what have you, because they don't understand the currency conversion.

But also, that's going to limit you to do any price promotions in the future. So I just recommend leaving pricing out of your trailer unless your app The second component to globally appropriateness is the content. The levels of offensive content vary around the globe, so just err on the side of caution and make sure that it's okay for all to see. Now the example I'm going to show you here of a great trailer that's really done an exceptional job of doing all these things is from an Italian developer called Music Match. So I'll play it here.

 Home, mountain, home, the Lord shines upon you   And your rugged peaks glow from heaven's light   From heaven's light   Looking in search of a better life, the miners we have   Granddaddy came from the Tennessee hills   With a clothesline that's back in a five-pillar bill 

[ Transcript missing ]

So I guess a little humor doesn't hurt either. These guys did a great job. We shared it on our Facebook page and it had one of our most highly engaged posts in quite a while. So great work there. So I'm going to conclude by talking about three of the paid channels.

And the first are mobile ads. Now I touched on a lot of this in the iAd discussion, but briefly, the reason mobile ads work so well, as many of you know, is that with mobile ads, it's the fewest taps away from an install. As you're engaged with an app or engaged with a mobile website, you can simply tap on the banner ad and be taken directly into the App Store.

You can use mobile ads not just for your user acquisition, but also to help build your brand. And one of the big benefits about mobile ads is the targeting capabilities. You can target by device, by demographic, by interest, by gender, many, many different things. So that's a real benefit to mobile ads.

But I want you to think about is you're creative when you're doing your mobile ad campaigns. And not the same piece of creative works everywhere. So think about the channel at which you're putting this creative through and customize it. It works on Facebook. It works great to use live action photos, maybe versus screenshots and what have you.

And then the last thing is to test your creative. I know of some developers that will create upwards of 50 pieces of creative for one single campaign. And they quickly test in real time how it's performing and they'll continue to invest in those pieces that work well. The second channel is print.

And I know print can get expensive, but for those that do engage within it, I want to share with you a few tips. And I feel the New York Times has really done a great job with this print campaign here. First, they're connecting visually by using our devices in their campaign. They're speaking to the iPhone and iPad customer by providing those images.

[ Transcript missing ]

The second is they're using an action verb such as download or search. And then finally, they're using their App Store URL. And this is something that every one of you in this room have access to. You have your own vanity URL, which is appstore.com/yourappname or appstore.com/developername. And we encourage you to use these URLs in any of your offline marketing, whether that's print, broadcast, whatever that might be.

It's very memorable. And if somebody sees it, they can remember to go to that URL to download your app. So the final channel I want to chat with you about is television, which I know is extremely expensive, but I'm seeing some great campaigns around the world and some great ones here in Europe particularly.

What makes television so effective is the fact that the devices are at hand. While you're watching television, your iPhone's in your pocket, your iPad is on your lap, and if it's a compelling enough piece, you will get people to convert. It's important to share those magic moments with television more than anything. What are the most magical things about your app that you can tell your customer in those 30 seconds? What makes television so effective is the fact that the devices are at hand.

While you're watching television, your iPhone's in your pocket, your iPad is on your lap, and if it's a compelling enough piece, you will get people to convert. It's important to share those magic moments with television more than anything. While you're watching television, your iPhone's in your pocket, your iPad is on your lap, and if it's a compelling enough piece, you will get people to convert.

Now you can watch your favorite Travel Channel shows anywhere, anytime on your iPad and iPhone. That's so fantastic. Download the free Watch Travel Channel app now at appstore.com/watchtravelchannel. Create your own personal watch list of full episodes. Stay in touch with your favorite hosts. Are you ready for this?

And get inspiration for your next trip. Good morning, Key West. Every destination begins with the new Watch Travel Channel app for your iPad and iPhone.   Really easy to activate against that as you're watching that commercial on TV by thinking about that URL. So they've done a great job there.

So I want to leave you with an email address. I want you all to know. It's appstoremarketingatapple.com. We have a global team of marketers that are here to help you. If you want to send us any questions about your marketing, we'd love to see any creative that you're working on before you finalize it. Drop us an email. We'll respond to you within five business days. So with that, I'm going to conclude. I'm going to hand things over to Shannon to talk about iTunes Connect. Thank you.

Thanks, Steve. Hi, my name is Shannon, and I work on the App Store operations team. You've been hearing a lot of great tips about choosing the right business model and how to best market your app. I'm going to talk about how you can execute on some of these tips through iTunes Connect.

So I know that all of you have at least one app on the App Store, so you should be very familiar with iTunes Connect. And you should understand that it is the gateway to the App Store. It's the website you use to create and manage your apps, request your promo codes, check your sales and financial reports, and much more. I'm going to cover three major topics today. First, I'll go over some recently launched and valuable features. Second, I'll show you how you can execute on your plans to localize your app.

And finally, I'll leave you with three tips and tricks that can help you manage your business more effectively. So let's start with our first valuable feature, promo codes. We provide you with 100 promo codes for each app version. This was recently increased from 50. And they're set up so that you can request them as you need them in any denomination. As Steve mentioned, we encourage you to reserve these codes for your media contacts, journalists, influencers, who can try out your app before it's available to the general public and write about it to help you promote it.

And up until recently, you were only able to request promo codes in the ready for sale state. But I'm happy to announce today that you can now request promo codes in the pending developer release date as well. This is very exciting because now you can promote the new features of your app updates before they're released instead of just the first version of your app. The second feature I want to cover is app transfer.

App transfer was a very exciting launch for us this year at WWDC. And it's the ability to transfer an app from one developer account to another. So what are some of the reasons you might use app transfer? The App Store has been in business for five years now.

And many of you have seen phenomenal success. You may have had the opportunity to sell your app to another developer or to Or you may have acquired a great app from another developer. or maybe some of you have registered multiple developer accounts with Apple and you'd like to consolidate those accounts to be managed as one. If you're in any of these situations, app transfer is a great solution for you.

And what are some of the benefits of app transfer? One of the greatest things about app transfer is that it is completely seamless to your customers, which means that there's no interruption in the ability to use the app, and new customers can continue to purchase the app as well.

You get to retain all of your chart placement, your customer ratings and reviews, and the ability to update the app for your customers. And there are really just minimal visible changes to the app on the store. The only thing that changes on the store is the seller name. So I'd like to walk through a flow just to show you what this looks like.

First, as the current owner, you'll log into iTunes Connect, select the app you wish to transfer, and enter in the new owner information. That is the Apple ID of the team agent and the team ID of the new owner account. Then Apple will draw up a contract agreement between you and the new owner. And once you've signed this agreement, the app moves into a sub-state called Pending App Transfer.

If your app is ready for sale at this time, customers can continue to purchase as all of this is going on in the background. Then as the new owner, you'll receive an email letting you know that a transfer has been made. letting you know that a transfer is waiting acceptance.

You'll log into iTunes Connect and you'll be required to enter in some new app metadata. I'll go into detail about this in just a minute. You'll then sign the same agreement and the app will move into processing app transfer where it's literally moving from the current owner to the new owner.

Now there are some rules regarding app transfer that I'm just going to go over a few of them that you should know before transferring an app. You want to agree to any available contract amendments. From time to time, Apple updates the terms of the program license agreement or the paid apps contract. You just want to make sure that you've agreed to these terms before transferring an app.

And the app will need to have at least one approved app version. You will not be able to transfer an app that is currently in review and that includes in-app purchase reviews as well. So as the current owner, what are some things you should have ready before initiating an app transfer?

You'll need to collect the new owner information. As I mentioned, that is the Apple ID of the team agent. This is not the password, just the username they use to log in. And the team ID of the new owner. The team ID is a unique identifier for your developer account. We also encourage you to back up your app history. Once the app is transferred, it's completely gone out of your iTunes Connect account, so you won't have access to this information.

[ Transcript missing ]

The second feature I want to talk about is alternate price tiers. We recently introduced some additional tiers for you to assign to your paid apps or in-app purchases. And these tiers are great for being able to vary your pricing in different currencies. There are five new tiers for your use. And these new tiers are completely market optimized, which means they're culturally relevant and consumer friendly to the customers in those markets.

And there are no restrictions, meaning that you can assign them to any of your apps. And the great thing about the App Store being on the agency model means that you can change your pricing at any time. These tiers also map to existing US dollar tiers as they are today. Something to note is that we currently only support the selection of these tiers through iTunes Connect. We don't support the assignment of these tiers through any other delivery method such as the import from file functionality.

And we also support the application loader or the XML feed through Transporter. But I do want to point out where you can select these tiers. This is the rights and pricing page of the app. And you can see that the alternate tiers are listed down at the bottom of the price tier list. And just to illustrate what this looks like, for an example, if my app is priced at tier one, you can see that that's 99 cents in the US dollar and 69 pence in the British pound.

However, if I select alternate tier one, the price remains 99 cents in the US dollar, but is now 99 pence in the British pound. This may be a little bit of a higher price for the customer, but it is a more culturally relevant price point. And to give you some more examples, tier one in the Euro is 89 Euro, but alternate tier one is 99 Euro.

And in the Chinese RMB, tier one is six RMB. And alternate tier one is eight RMB. So we encourage you to check out these new tiers and see what works for your app and your business model. The last feature I want to talk about is automation. We know that your time as developers is very valuable, and we do all that we can to save you time, especially when it comes to repetitive actions in iTunes Connect. So there's two areas of automation that I want to cover that I think will be very helpful in saving you some time. The first area of automation is auto-ingesting your reports.

We provide you with a command line tool that allows you to automate the delivery of your reports from iTunes Connect. And it's been available for your sales and trends reports, but we recently expanded it to include the payment reports as well. And it just allows you to download your reports without actually having to log into iTunes Connect each time.

So in order to use this tool, you'll first download the auto-ingestion class file at the URL here. Then you'll change your directory location to the one that you're using for your app. You'll first download the auto-ingestion class file at the URL here. Then you'll change your directory level to point to the class file.

And you'll need to create a properties file for your login credentials. That is your iTunes Connect Apple ID and your iTunes Connect password. The great thing about this properties file is that it allows you to put a little more security around your login credentials as you used to enter this information directly into the command line. So it just allows your password to be a little bit more secure. And I'll walk through what this command looks like for each of the reports so you know how to do this for your own account.

This is the command for the sales reports. And all of the information in the angle brackets will be replaced with your own values. And the parameters will be delimited with the space. You'll start by entering your vendor ID. This is another unique identifier for your developer account. And this one in particular can be found in the contracts, tax, and banking module.

Then you'll indicate the report type. For this standard sales report, you'll enter sales. Or if you're a newsstand developer and you're looking for a new sales report, you'll enter sales. Or if you're a newsstand developer and you wish to download the newsstand reports, you'll enter newsstand. Next, you'll indicate the reporting timeframe. That's going to be the daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly interval.

And the report subtype will be summary for the standard sales report, detailed for the newsstand report, or if you're using auto-renewable subscriptions, you may be collecting personal information from your customers who have chosen to share this information with you, and you can download these reports using opt-in. Finally, you'll indicate the date range, and this is the exact date for the report you wish to download. This field is optional, and if you do not indicate a date, we'll just provide you with the latest available report for the parameters you've indicated.

Similarly, this is the command for the payment reports, and you'll start by entering the same vendor ID, but for the payment reports, you need to include two leading zeros in front of your vendor ID. Then, since the payment reports are not available, you'll need to include two leading zeros in front of your vendor ID. Finally, you'll indicate the reporting region code, and if you need to access a list of these region codes, there is one available in the Payments and Financial Reports user guide in iTunes Connect.

And the report type is always going to be DRR, which is the standard report type for the payment reports. And finally, you'll enter the fiscal year and fiscal period. If you need to access a copy of Apple's fiscal calendar, there is one available in the Payments and Financial Reports model. module on iTunes Connect.

So that's auto-ingesting your reports. And the second area of automation I want to cover is Apple's command line tool called Transporter. Transporter allows you to automate the delivery of your metadata, and it gives you the ability to integrate with your own content management system if you have one. We recently introduced the ability to deliver your rights and pricing changes through Transporter. You can request catalog reports, and you can deliver your app metadata, which can be extremely helpful when localizing your app.

This brings me to the next topic of localization setup. We've been talking about how you should think global and be local. And you know that the App Store is in 155 countries worldwide, and we offer you 28 languages for setting up localizations with your metadata. We highly recommend using professional localization resources. As Alex mentioned earlier.

And we advise against using automated translation services you might find on the web, as they may translate your content, but don't fully localize it to be culturally relevant. We also encourage you to localize your app wherever possible. Alex showed a great example of Evernote, where they localized everything, including their screenshots.

And we know that this can be a lot of fields to enter into iTunes Connect, but it's really important to do so. And that's why the XML feed can be very helpful as well. Before I go into detail about that, I do want to point out one other thing about localization setup.

And that's that you are required to submit your app for review when you add new localizations. So just make sure that you leave enough time for the review process if you do wish to add new localizations for your app. So for those of you who wish to cut down on the repetitive actions that localizing can bring, we encourage you to adopt the automated process of XML feed delivery.

And the steps for using Transporter and the XML feed are fairly simple. You can start by looking up your existing metadata from the Apple database. And that will provide you with your current app metadata in the format that it will need to be uploaded. Then you can make any necessary changes.

And after making your changes, you can run Transporter in verify mode, which allows you to check your changes against our XML specifications. Then you can upload your content. And it's ready to be delivered with your next update. You will still need to create your new app versions in iTunes Connect. And you'll want to monitor your state transitions, as this cannot be done through Transporter. And I'm not going to walk through a demo.

But I do want to point you to some of the documentation available in the Manage Your Apps module of iTunes Connect. And I want to encourage you to check out the WWDC session video from this year called What's New in iTunes Connect. They go in a little bit more detail. And they do a full end-to-end demo of what this looks like.

So if you're interested in watching this session video, you can access it from the developer portal. And we know that once you've set up localizations in iTunes Connect, you like to see what this looks like for your customer on the store. Because we get a lot of questions about what this looks like.

One thing I want to point out, this is the Pages app for an example. And we get a lot of questions about the list of languages that appears in the information section on the app page. This list of languages is not the list of languages you've set up in iTunes Connect.

This list of languages comes from the lproj folder in your binary and is meant to be the languages that you have localized your app into for when the customer has downloaded it. The localizations that you set up in iTunes Connect are automatically displayed on the App Store based on the customer's OS language and storefront. And they'll automatically display here. So just to take a look at what a couple different localizations look like on the App Store, here are a few examples. And you can see how great this looks for the customers.

I'd like to leave you with a few tips and tricks that will help you run your business more effectively. Tip number one is regarding viewing your localizations on the device. We just saw what this looks like on the desktop, but it can be a little bit trickier to view this on the device. So I'll walk you through how to change your iOS language and storefront on the device.

You'll start by entering multitasking mode in order to quit out of the App Store. Next, you'll go to General in your settings and tap International. Then tap Language. And then this is where you can select the iOS language that you wish to change to. For this example, I'm choosing Chinese. So select the language, then tap Done.

After that, you'll go back to the App Store, and if you're logged into your personal iTunes account, you'll want to sign out, and then you'll tap the Sign In button again. Here you can see that the language has started to change to Chinese. And I don't personally speak Chinese, but I know that the third line here is the option to create a new Apple ID.

And this is where the trick comes in. You don't actually have to create a new Apple ID, but you will start walking through the flow. So tap the option to create a new Apple ID. And then you'll be prompted to select a storefront. This is where you can select the territory that you wish to change your store to. And for this example, I'll choose China.

At this point, you can tap cancel to exit out of the flow. Once you exit out of the flow, your storefront will automatically change to the territory you've selected. So now that we're in the China App Store with our iOS set to Chinese, if we search for the Pages app, we'll see the localization set up for Pages.

Tip number two is regarding tracking your customer reviews. Alex talked about how important tracking your reviews can be for your business. And while you can do this on the App Store, we also encourage you to check this out on iTunes Connect. This page can be located from the app summary page. And the great thing about viewing your customer reviews in iTunes Connect is that you can easily toggle between the different territories.

Since customer reviews are specific to each of the different territories, you can easily toggle between the different territories. And you can access and subscribe to an RSS feed, which allows you to receive instant feedback when customers post new reviews. And tip number three is our advice for scheduling a sale.

The App Store is a global marketplace and we operate in different international time zones. What this means is that pricing and availability changes happen at different times in different countries in different time zones across the globe. And it's what we call a rolling price and availability setting because the change begins propagating in one area of the world and rolls across over a period of time. So to illustrate this, let's take a look at a map. And I'll use a price change as an example.

Let's say my app is paid and I wish to run a 24-hour sale where customers can download my app for free. When the change begins, the app will first fall to free in the New Zealand and South Pacific region, followed by the Asia Pacific region. Then, Australia, Russia, India, and the Middle East. Next, Africa, Europe, and Latin America. And finally, the change will happen in North America.

And because of this rolling schedule, we recommend that if you wish to run a 24-hour sale, that you actually set it up for three days in iTunes Connect. This will ensure that the change will fully propagate for a full 24 hours in each territory. And just to show you what this looks like in iTunes Connect, you can see here that I've set the change to begin on the 10th and end on the 13th.

So that concludes our session for today. I want to thank you for your time. Here's a list of some of the resources we went over today. And if you have any questions, I encourage you to come ask us in the lab about any of your marketing or distribution questions or to visit any of the others. We're going to take a short break and we'll start up again in about five minutes with more on architecting modern apps.
