---
Title:  What's New in iAd Workbench
Year:   2014
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2014/510/

[!] This transcript has potential transcription errors.
---

Good morning. And welcome to WWDC session on iAd Workbench. I'm Paresh Rajwat and I'm here with my colleague, Ravi Chittari, to share with you how we're evolving the iAd Workbench platform. We have some awesome stuff we are bringing to you this fall, and I can't wait to share it with you. But before we go there, knowing some of you are probably new to advertising, and perhaps hearing the word iAd Workbench for the first time. Let's start with two foundational questions. Why advertise? And why iAd? Let's start with the first question: why advertise.

Say you developed this app, you put a lot of time and energy in it and you put it on the App Store. Now two things can happen. First, users can find your app, or second, you can find users for your app. Users will find your app if they know about you, or your app is featured in one of the categories in the App Store. But with thousands of apps coming on the App Store every day, natural discovery of your app becomes increasingly difficult and you don't have much control on it. So what can you do to take more control of the success of your app?

You can advertise. When you advertise, you can find the right users that will make the difference. And when it comes to advertising your apps or your products to millions of Apple costumers around the world, iAd is your best choice. Why? Because iAd is part of Apple, and we know Apple users, all 800 million of them. We know what apps and other items content they downloaded and we know how and when they use it. Last June, we introduced iAd Workbench. It's self-service mobile advertising platform that provides you the simplest way to promote your product to millions of Apple users around the world.

Since we introduced iAd Workbench, we have successfully helped developers, many of them advertising for the very first time, drive millions of visits to their iTunes product pages. iAd Workbench is open to everyone. And you can promote anything using iAd Workbench. You can promote your apps. You can promote your products, your brands, your service, including your iTunes content, whether it's music, books or movies.

Last June when we introduced iAd Workbench, we started in the U.S. as the first market. And then a few months after that, we expanded internationally. iAd Workbench is now available in 14 countries and expanding rapidly. Now creating a campaign using iAd Workbench is very easy. You can create one in just a few minutes. To demonstrate, why don't I have Ravi show you how easy it is to advertise using iAd Workbench.

Thank you, Paresh. Good morning everyone. I'm Ravi Chittari from iAd Engineering team. I'm here to demo iAd Workbench. In this demo, you will see how easy it is to promote an app. During this demo, you will see several options, but I'm going to focus on a few and will cover more later. Let's get started.

iAd Workbench is accessible through iadworkbench.apple.com. All you need is an Apple ID to log in. When you log in, the first page you go to is the Dashboard. Dashboard is a summary of all the campaigns, and also it gives basic metrics. To get into the campaign creation flow, let's click on Create Campaign.

The first choice you have is what do you want to promote? App or a Product? Let's select App. Below are the three apps that are published to the App Store from my developer account. iAd Workbench automatically gets all the apps that you published to the App Store and makes it available here so you can promote through campaigns. Let me select Klara. For a bid type, my goal is to drive downloads. I'm going to select CPC, cost per click. Let me name my campaign.

Clicking on Next will take me to step 2, Targeting. Targeting is all about finding the right audience for your campaign. We have two options, Auto and Manual. In case of Auto, iAd finds the right audience for you. In case of Manual, you get to set the targeting preferences. Let me set up Auto.

Next, country where your ad is going to run. I'm going to select United States. Next, Ad. Ad is a combination of Creative and Destination. I'm going to select Banner for Creative and Destination: iTunes. iTunes destination refers to the App Store product page where user can review the app details and download the app right from there.

Next, flight dates. These are the dates during which your campaign is going to run. The default started is today and ended is a month from now. Let's leave it as is. Next, budget. How much money you are willing to spend on this campaign? Let me enter 2,000 dollars. Daily Spend Goal is automatically calculated.

CPC Bid: how much you are willing to pay per click, the maximum you're willing to pay per click. You may enter 50 cents. Let's leave the CPA Goal optional. Clicking on Calculate will give us the estimated number of impressions and tabs. If you want to see more impressions and tabs, you can change the combination of targeting, budget, and bid, and you'll see more.

Next, let's name our line. I've used the term "line" several times in this page. What is line? A line is a combination of targeting, budget, and bid. You can have several lines in a campaign. I'm going to name this line, My Simple Auto Line. Clicking on Next will take me to the Targeting Summary page where all the lines are listed. For this campaign, we have just one line. You can always add more lines by clicking on Create Line button. Clicking on Next will take us to step 3, which is Creating an Ad.

The first choice we have is selecting a device where your ad is going to run. Klara is a universal app, so the system detected that and gave iPhone, iPad on Universal. Let's select Universal. For language, let's stick with English. We have more choices there as well. Then let's define the creative. There are two choices, Using a Template and From My Desktop.

From My Desktop is upload your own Banner. But for now, let's select templates. We have built several templates for you to make it easy. As you can see, there are different formats for these templates. Let me select marigold. For title, let's give the name of the app. And for message, few words about your app.

And for Call to Action, you have several predefined ones or you can always enter a custom text. I'm going to select Download Now. And here is the preview of how your Banner is going to look on the device. You can click on View All Sizes to see how we have prepared this creative for iPhone, iPad, portrait and landscape.

That's how simple it is. Let's select their destination, iTunes. As you saw, as soon as I selected the destination, it's pointing to the Klara iTunes product page. For this ad to go live, we need to associate this with the line that we just created. I'm assigning to the line. We give that name, Marigold 1.

Clicking on Next will take us to the Ad Summary page where you will see all the ads that are created for this campaign. And you can always create more Ads from here by clicking on Create Ad. Clicking on Next will take us to the Campaign Summary page where you can review all the details in one place.

Where you're promoting, what you're targeting, what are your ads. In case you have not set up the payment yet, which is a credit card, you can always click here, but let's Submit. When you submit, the creatives are submitted for iAd's Certification review. Once they are approved, your campaign goes live. That's how simple it is. Back to you, Paresh.

So next, let's take a deeper dive at the tools, options, controls, flexibility you have in making advertising work using iAd Workbench. We'll look at the choices you have in choosing your audience, the controls you have in setting your price, the tools and options you have to create an ad that will make an impact, and finally, the data and insights you have to understand your campaign performance and optimize. Let's start with choosing your audience. Selecting the right audience for your app or product is key. With iAd Workbench, we make it very easy for you to define your audience. At the highest level, you have two options.

Auto and Manual. Auto targeting, which you saw in the demo is the simplest and probably the most powerful option we have on iAd Workbench. This is where iAd does all the heavy lifting for you. If you want control, you can choose Manual. When you choose Manual, you'll have several options to define your audience.

On the left side, you see simple targeting options like gender, age, geo, and device. You can choose, for age, you can choose specific age groups that you want to target. For geo, you can choose or specify states and DMAs that you want to target for your users. On the right side, there are some very powerful options.

Starting to the top, iTunes Preferences is an option that is exclusive to iAd. This is where the power of the App Store and the iTunes Store comes together to help you find the right audience. When you make a selection here, you're basically selecting users who have actually downloaded content in that category.

So if you were to promote a health and fitness app, wouldn't it be great if you could choose the audience who like to download health and fitness apps, or who like to download fitness and workout music. With iAd Workbench, you can do that. It's very powerful. The next three options lets you define where your ad wants-where you want to show your ad, which is App Channels. When you want to show your ad, that's scheduling and how often do you want to show an ad to a particular user, which is frequency capping. You can mix and match any of these options to define the right audience for your campaign.

Next, let's look at the flexibility you have in setting your price. With iAd Workbench, you can choose how you want to pay for your campaign. If you want to pay for every click, you can choose CPC. If you want to pay for every thousand impressions, you can choose CPM. The bid you enter is the maximum you're willing to pay when you win the auction. iAd Workbench is a bidded marketplace. And on this platform, you have the peace of mind to know that you only pay a penny more than the next highest bidder.

Now let's look at the options you have in creating your ad. There are a range of options you have when it comes to selecting your ad. You can have Banner Ads, Video Ads, which are also known as pre-roll, and Rich-Media Ads if you want higher engagement of the users with your ads.

Banner ads provide a direct path to action. Upon tap of a banner, you can take a user directly to an iTunes product page or to a mobile website. Upon tap of a banner, you can also take a user and show them a video and then take them to iTunes product page or to a mobile website. Let's take a look as an example how a banner ad looks like. Here's an app, you see the ad will render at the bottom.

After a few seconds, the ad will refresh, the user engages with the ad. And when the user clicks on it, the user is taken to the App Store. The user can download the app at this point. Now once the user downloads the app, you don't show the same download ad again to this user, which means you don't waste your money showing your ads to users who already have your app.

Next is Video ads. Video ads play automatically before a video content. They play directly in fullscreen mode. With video ads, you can also have an optional call to action which will take the user to an iTunes product page or a mobile website. Here's an example of a video ad.

- [Background Music] You can chase light, or let the light chase you. Introducing LightRight, an iOS bookmarking tool for natural light. LightRight for iPhone, now available in the App Store.
- As you noticed, there was a Learn More link at the bottom of that video. The user clicks on that Learn More link and the user is taken to the iTunes product page. You can also have the user go to a mobile website. If you want to create rich-media ads for more higher engagement, you can do that using iAd Workbench as well.

Upon tap of a banner, you can immerse your users into a very custom product or brand experience. You can choose any combination of features and any combination of call to actions to create a rich-media ad. I'll show you an example that the client had actually used really good features to create a great experience. Let's take a look. Here's the app. You see the ad being rendered. The user taps on the ad, and is taken-is immersed into a brand experience. The user can browse through the pictures gallery.

The user is still within the app. You can take the user to Facebook so you can have a Facebook integration. You can have the user like your page on Facebook. You can have the reservations module within the ad. And finally, you can even integrate the app download right from this place. So as you see, you can do a lot of things when it comes to rich-media ads.

Now that awesome ad was created using a free tool that is available to everyone which is called iAd Producer. With iAd Producer, you can create highly interactive rich-media ads. They made it so easy for you that you can just drag and drop your assets in a visual layout. Or you can customize the visual layout.

We provide you with an extensive library of over 500 blueprints which are like templates. And when you use one of these blueprints, they come with built-in performance and analytics so you can see how your user is engaging and interacting with the rich-media ad. And finally, with iAd Producer 4.2 that was introduced just two weeks ago, you have integrated iAd Producer with Workbench, which means, if you create an ad using iAd Producer, you can now upload it directly on to Workbench. And when you go to Workbench, you'll have it available to use.

So once you create your campaign, your campaign is running and you want to see how the campaign is performing. When it comes to campaign performance, we provide you rich analytics that helps you understand how your campaign is doing so you can take the right actions. We give you data, performance metrics, as well as conversion metrics which includes, you know, what your spend is, your capture rate is, number of impressions you got, as well as the downloads that you've received so you can tune your campaign.

We provide you this data at every level at the aggregate campaign level as well as at lower line and ad levels. You can also download this data as a .CSV file from any of the analytic screens. So, at this point, I'll ask Ravi to walk us through some of these tools and options that we talked about to make your advertising work.

Thank you, Paresh. In this demo, I'm going to walk you through some of the core concepts that Paresh has mentioned, touch and targeting, some of the new ad formats analytics. Let's get started. I've been working on a campaign I'm halfway through it, let's finish this campaign together.

I created a campaign and created just one line with a manual targeting and I want to finish-show you what targeting I've set up by editing the line and later, we'll add ads to this one. A targeting option, we're going to select as Manual and this-and for the country, let's leave it as United States. And these are the different targeting options that we have available.

You can see all the options on the left-hand side. On the right, you will see the options that we have selected. By default, it's All. Next, I'm going to target few of the app references. I'm going to select Lifestyle, Photo and Video and Travel. Then for App Channels, I want to do similar thing. I'm going to do Lifestyle, I'm going to do Photo and Video and Travel.

You can always select more based upon, you know, how it's performing. For app type, last time we did for creative: banner. This time we're going to do video as a creative to a website as a destination. My goal here is to drive traffic to the website. And for flight dates, let's leave it as a default and I've given some spend, budget and bid here. Let's go to the next step where we can create an ad.

Here we have two choices, a banner or a video. Let's select video. And where your ad-you want your ad to run for devices for maximum reach, let's pick Universal. For language, let's keep it at English. And here we are at a step where we need to upload a video file. iAd Workbench supports two formats for the video file, .M4V and .MOV. There are few more specs here right here. We encourage you to follow the specs so you don't trip on any validation errors. Let's upload.

The file is being uploaded from my laptop to the Workbench servers right now. Once the file reaches the servers, the file will be transcoded to multiple formats to suit the devices and resolutions like iPhone high res, low res, iPad high res and low res. It's uploading right now.

Let it take its time. I guess everybody is using the network bandwidth I guess. So, right now it seems like the file has reached the server as you saw the status changed to Formatting. This is when the video transcoding is happening. It's actually transforming the video to suit the other devices. Let's take a quick review.

- [Background Music] You can chase light or let the light chase you. Introducing LightRight, an iOS bookmarking tool for natural light. LightRight for iPhone, now available from the App Store.
- That was a cool video. I just want to highlight one thing here. For you as an advertiser, prepare one file to one technical specification and be assured that your ad-video ad is going to run on all the Apple devices in the best way possible, so, that's how simple it is to create a video ad here. Use this ad format, we encourage you to take advantage of it. Let's select the destination. As I said I'm going to the website. You can view the URL right here.

And then it will ask you for the destination, for the name. I like the name LightRight website here. So I'm going to leave it as is. For this app to go live, you need to assign to the line. I'm going to assign to the video line that I created earlier. Let's name the ad. I'm going to name it as My Awesome Video.

Clicking on Next will take us to the Ad Summary page. So, that's the demo of the powerful ad format video ad. So far in my two demos, we mainly focused on creating a campaign, on editing a campaign, focused on a little bit on targeting and ad formats. Once a campaign is created, the next thing to focus is monitoring the performance of the campaign to ensure that it is going towards the goal you have set out for.

In order to monitor the performance of the campaign, we have some analytics. So, next, I want you to take-I want to take you to the analytics pages. I have these two campaigns that have been running for the last 6 months. I want to show the performance of these campaigns.

As you see the Dashboard used the basic metrics spend, impressions, TTR and conversions. You can click on any of these metrics and go into the details. By default, it gives Since Campaign Start and you have different custom data groups you can select that we have prepared for you. Let me select last 30 days.

That's the spend for the last 30 days for this campaign. Seems like we are spending more in the weekends and spend is coming down during the weekdays. You have different metrics that you can view. I've listed here. And you can overlay any metric on top of it. Or if you want to compare how you've been spending, compare to the previous period, you can always select Compare with Previous Period. That gives you how the last 30 days is performing as opposed to the previous 30 days.

Overlay is a pretty neat feature where you can overlay any metric here and compare to the spend. I ordered average CPA metric. It seems like we are doing less than 2 dollars for download here. Let's go into the lines. By default, it gives you the cumulative number. You can always select Time, Time Series graph to see how the lines are performing. It seems like we are spending more on this line than this one. And you can do similar analysis on ad side as well.

By default, it gives you the spend for cumulative. You can always change the metrics and change to the time series graph. We're pretty close on these two ads here. Let me go back to the summary and find out a couple of things here. You can easily toggle between a graph and a table view if you choose to do so. Or if you can scroll down and you can click on Download CSV to get a file onto your desktop and do offline analysis. And Download CSV is available across the board on Dashboard on every analytic space that we have.

So, that's a quick overview of, you know, how to measure the performance of your campaign. All the data that I've been showing in last 5 minutes, that data is available through the API. So, next, I'm going to drop you through the complete overview of iAd Workbench API that we have released this year.

So, your-you are an advertiser. You have created multiple campaigns and managing all those campaigns. And you want to scale beyond the web interface. API is for you. Say you're an advertiser who wanted to get the metrics and incorporate it to your own dashboards. API is for you. Let's get into the-more details. You can also use it for bulk operations.

API has two broad categories. Reporting, where you can get the metrics and perform the offline and real-time analysis. What do I mean by real-time analysis here? You can write a program for example that runs at the top of every hour, get some metrics, analyze the data and modify your campaign data. You can trace the bid, start and stop a campaign ad. That's what I'm talking about real-time analysis. For offline analysis, you can do your own dashboards. And campaign management, you can get the campaign details, update the critical campaign data and start and stop campaign lines or ads.

Let's get into some very basics. We're talking about API here. For communication, API uses JSON or HTTPS. We want to keep the data protocol pretty simple so it's easy to understand and it's easy to test. We use JSON for data protocol and secure HTTPS for security. The next: authentication, we use client certificates, private key and access token as a combination for authentication, making it a very strong authentication. And for key management, we want to make it as easy as possible so you can be having web interface for that on Workbench app.

So, how do you initiate this API? We have three basic steps: download keys, verify keys and integrate. Go to Workbench, go to the API page, click on the Download link to download the keys. When you download the keys, we give you a .zip file that has keys and sample programs. And sample programs are already embedded with your keys. Run those sample programs and verify the keys. And then download the API programming guide, write your own programs, deploy them on your servers and integrate, that's how simple it is.

Let me quickly walk you through some of the core methods here. We have InitSession for session initialization, which is key because you need to pass the sessionId for every method that you are going to call in your program for API. Campaign method-metadata methods to get the campaign details, reporting API to get the metrics. And campaign management API to update the details as well as start and stop.

Now, I'm going to walk you through some of the sample program that I've already done using the highlighted methods here, InitSession, GetCampaignDetails and UpdateLine. So, here is a sample program, sample method where I'm trying to pass access token, prepare the request tab, post it to the server then get the response back and read the session from that, sessionId from the response. Once I get the sessionId, I pass the sessionId to getCampaignDetails method, get the campaign IDs and filter by running state, post that to the server, get the response back.

Next, for the campaign details I got, I'm passing the LineId for which I want to increase the bid. So I gave the line-SessionId, LineId and the CPMBid, post to server, and get the response back. That's how simple it is to write the programs to communicate with the API. Powerful, secure and easy to use, go try it out. With this, I'm going to pass on to Paresh to walk us through what's coming next. There you go Paresh.

Thank you, Ravi. It's fascinating what you can do with the APIs and how you can make bulk changes to your campaigns from your own user interface. So, what's coming this fall? So far, we've talked about how iAd Workbench can help you acquire new customers. But that's just half the battle. For you to grow your business, you also need to re-engage with your existing customers and have them do more of what you want, whether it's spending more time in your app, buying more of your products, or even trying your new apps.

I came across a study recently on the web by a mobile analytics firm, Localytics, which said 22 percent of the apps that were downloaded were used only once and over 60 percent of them were used less than 10 times. Now, you want users to frequently engage with your app or your website. Let's take a few examples how engaged-re-engaging with your customers can help you grow your business.

First example is about a game app. So you came up with a new iPad version of your iPhone game. Now, who will be the best customers for this new app? Of course, the users who use that game on the iPhone. What if you had a way to connect with these customers and inform them about your new game? And what if you could inform them about this new game when they are on their iPad?

Or, say you enhanced your app and you added more levels more game levels or you have more things that you want to sell in your app. What if you had a way to re-engage with the users and show or promote these levels only to users who have reached certain levels in your game or show this merchandise only to users who actually buy merchandise like this?

And what about all those users who downloaded your app but haven't used it in the last two weeks? What if you had a way to reconnect with them and motivate them to try-come back and try your app again? And what if you could connect with them when they're not in your app? Let's take another example.

A retail app. Say you have a retail app. Now, you have users who browse through your product catalog and add things to the shopping basket. Many of these users exit the app before they actually make a purchase. What if you had a way to find these users and bring them back to finish the purchase and what if you could bring them back exactly at the point where they had left in the shopping basket so they can finish the transaction in next step. And if you want to send offers to your loyal customers, what if you could show these offers to your loyal customers irrespective of what iOS device they are on?

And for users and your customers who have items in their wish list, what if you could reconnect with these and inform them when the items on the wish list are on sale? Now, in each of these examples that we talked about, we talked about reconnecting with a specific group of audience. Whether it's all the customers who have downloaded your app or the dormant users who haven't used your app, or the loyal users who do purchases for you, or the users who have an abandoned cart on your shopping-on your app. We call this group of audiences as "segments".

Now there are probably a million ways you could segment audiences. You know your business and your app, and your users best. So you will segment your users the way you want it. And for you to easily create segments, we're introducing a new functionality this fall with iOS 8 which we call Audience Segmentation.

Building segments using Audience Segmentation is very easy. You can do it in just two steps. The first one is you get segment IDs from iAd Workbench. Now, every segment is unique so it has a unique segment ID. You can download the segment IDs from iAd Workbench. Once you get the segment IDs, you then integrate those segment IDs in your app.

You map the user behavior of the functionality you have in the app with these segment IDs. And when the user demonstrates a particular user behavior or reaches a functionality, say reaches a particular level, you instrument it in a way that you automatically make API call using the new iOS 8 SDK, and pass that segment ID onto Workbench. Now when you do that, your segments will automatically start getting populated on iAd Workbench. Here's an example where segmentation was done based on time spent in an app.

To avail your segments, users who have spent less than 1 hour in the app, 1 to 10 hours, 10 to 20 and 20 plus hours in the app. Now, if you were to reconnect or re-engage with these users, you would probably have a very different strategy when it comes to reengaging you with users who have spent less than an hour in your app compared to who have spent more than 20 hours. Here's another example where segmentation is based on levels of use.

Whenever a user reaches a particular level, they go from level 1 to level 2. The API call that I talked about is automatically made from the client side from your app and the right segment ID is passed and the user gets added to this new segment. So once you do segmentation this way using iOS 8, we can unlock some amazing things which brings us to the second thing that we're introducing this fall, we call it Audience Insights.

When your segments reach a particular threshold of users, we will show you unique audience insights into your segments, all for free at no charge. These insights are based on iTunes data. So we'll show you how the distribution is of the users in your segment, the demographic distribution. How age, gender, household income distribution is for these users.

We'll show you the top regions, the top countries, top states, DMAs these users come from, the top languages these users have on their devices as well as the top iTunes preferences of these users. So you know what are the things they really like to download. Now once you have these unique insights, you can take some very tangible actions.

If you know the demographics of your audience in the segment, you can fine tune your app to suit more of the demographics. If you know the top regions and the languages of your audience, you might want to consider localizing your app. If you have an English app and you know that the top region is Asia Pacific and the top language is Japanese, you might want to make a Japanese app. If you created a segment of all your loyal users, now you understand the characteristics of those audience.

And then using Workbench targeting, you can find more of the same and you can build your audience pool. And finally, with audience segmentation and audience targeting together, we can bring you another big thing which we are also introducing this fall and we call it Audience Retargeting. Audience retargeting lets you re-engage with every segment that you have in a customized way so you can give a custom experience through each of your segments. So now when you have those dormant users who didn't use your app, you can re-engage with those users with that segment. Show them a custom message, motivate them to come back and try your app again.

And when you have users who have reached a certain level and you want to push them to the next level, you can create a segment of the users who have reached say level 2. Show them a custom message about level 3. When they engage with that, take them to level 3, not open the app, deep link them directly to level 3.

And those users who had an abundant cart in your retail app, you can now re-engage or retarget those users irrespective of what device they are on and bring them back to your app. And not only bring them back, deep link them directly to the shopping basket, so in the next step they can finish the purchase.

So really anything is possible. For each of your segments, you can create that awesome message and take the user to wherever you want in the app or even to any website. Now that's not it. With audience retargeting, we'll actually find those users for you on any iOS device. So now when you had that example but you introduce your iPad app, a new app, now you can find you iPhone app users when they're on the iPad.

So what we are introducing here is a cross-app, cross-device retargeting. That is huge. What else is unique about this? The first thing is automation that comes with it. When you build segments using iOS 8, your segments are automatically updated in real-time. No more of manually harvesting idea phase, sharing them with your network partners. Your data is most secure when it's in one place. And there's no better place than Apple iAd. When you create segments this way, segmentation is automated, audience insights run based on segmentation, that's real-time updated as well as the audience retargeting is updated in real-time.

The next thing is Privacy. Audience retargeting and this entire solution we talked about is deeply integrated with iOS. So you get all the benefits of the built-in privacy controls that come with it. The solution complies with the Limit Ad Tracking. So now if you have a user who has Limit Ad Tracking on, that user is removed automatically from the segments. So the user is not retargeted. Everything is automated. You have nothing to worry about.

So with Audience Segmentation, Audience Insights, and Audience Retargeting, iAd becomes-iAd Workbench becomes a complete solution. You can, not only acquire new users and new customers, you can now understand your existing users and re-engage with them to grow your business. What else is coming? We'll be introducing two new ad formats this fall. Interstitial ads which are also called as fullscreen banners and Medium Rectangle also call as MREC. Both these ad formats will be available on iPad as well as on iPhone. So with that, you will have four ad formats to choose: the banner ads, video ads, interstitials and MREC.

The next is we're going to continue enhancing the iAd Workbench APIs. We'll introduce iAd Workbench API 2.0 which will give you a full read-write campaign creation capability. So if you work with a Demand Side Partner, also called as DSP, you can now have your DSP plug into iAd Workbench and create and manage campaigns on your behalf from their own UI ad interface.

That's a move towards programmatic buying, automated way of booking campaigns and managing them from your own UI. We'll also provide you APIs for segmentation that we talked about just in-a little bit ago. And finally, we'll continue with the geo expansion. We'll go in more countries and there is bunch more things that we have in plans for you.

So to summarize, as you saw in the demos and throughout the talk, iAd Workbench is the simplest way for you to reach Apple users. It's very powerful and it's open to everyone. So if you haven't tried iAd Workbench yet, go to iadworkbench.apple.com and log in with just your Apple ID.

Make sure you take advantage of the APIs that we reviewed today. And the new ad formats that are available now and coming in fall. And finally, the key thing, make sure you enable your app for segmentation so you can get those free insights that we just talked about and you can also re-engage with your current customers. If you have more questions, please reach out to our evangelist, Mark Malone. We have lots of documentation on iAd Online Workbench Help. And you can also find us in the Apple Developer Forum.

There was a session which is very related to some of the things that we talked about today. It was yesterday. In case you missed it, make sure you watch it later on. In that session, we talked about how to use the API for segmentation. So if you're interested in that, make sure you take a look at that. That's it. Thank you and have a great WWDC.
