---
Title:  Managed Desktop Technologies
Year:   2003
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2003/611/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Good afternoon. Let me get a quick drink here before I get the cotton mouth. All right. So my name's Michael Lopp. I'm the manager of Desktop Management Solutions for Apple Computer. I'm really excited to be talking with you guys today, mostly because I've been sitting in the car for two weeks working on this presentation, and my wife and kids are really getting tired of hearing about managed desktop technologies.

So let's get started. We're going to spend a little time today, we're going to be talking about what our strategy is for desktop management at Apple. And as we go through, we're going to give you some live demonstrations of NetBoot, Network Install, and Apple Remote Desktop, as well as managed desktop. So let's get started.

So what we're going to learn today. We're going to give you this overview of what we've done as part of Panther Server, as part of Apple Remote Desktop. We're going to spend some time on understanding how these different technologies are actually going to work together. We're going to talk about some of the new features that we have in each of these releases. And most importantly, what we're going to be doing is we're going to be giving you, sysadmins and IT folks, ideas of how to use these solutions together because you all have different management policies out there.

And our tools, it's really important that our tools work well together to provide a variety of solutions. So before we start, a show of hands. How many people are responsible for two or more Macs? And by responsible, I mean if something goes wrong with them, you're the person that's called. Hands up. Two or more.

OK. Good. OK. Keep them up. Keep them up. So 50 or more? Whoa. 100 or more? A thousand or more? Aha, OK. Interesting. Oh, sorry. I can't really see you guys up here. 5,000 or more? Excellent. Very good. Great to see. 5,000 Macs, ladies and gentlemen. That's a lot. One more? This guy's got more. Is he an Apple employee? 35,000. 35,000 Macs. We're all NetBooty.

I wonder about that. I wonder about that. One second. OK, so 35,000. I lose the bet. OK, so let's talk about desktop management. A gentleman here in the front row earlier was asking me, what does management mean, right? Is it my manager talking to me and doing stuff? No, it's not that. What it is, the way that we see it is there's basically three steps to desktop management. And we're going to talk about the lifecycle here, desktop management lifecycle. We're going to make it simple. Let's not talk about 35,000 mats.

Let's talk about one single Macintosh. And the steps-- well, the business process steps that we see, that I see, are deploy, manage, and assess. Now let me talk about what each of these means. For the one Mac, deploy. Box shows up. Get it out of the box. I've got to get it to somebody. It's got to be a marketing person. He needs an operating system or she needs a set of applications. That's deploy.

Bunch of decisions. Some action. Then we have to actually get it out to them. Each of you has a different management policy. Some of you are giving them a user and a network password. Some of you want absolute control over the desktop. So you've got a whole other set of decisions there. That's manage.

And then there's assess, which is, OK, great. I've got the iMac. It's sitting out there. And then things are happening to it. There's new software coming out. There's troubleshooting that needs to be going on. There's new operating systems coming out. So all these things, every decision that we just talked about here is part of the work for you guys out there. They're actually working on managing these machines. And I'm just talking about a single Mac here. We just talked about one single Mac. So what about if you've got five, 50, 35,000? What if you're this guy?

What if you've got-- that's a lot of iMacs there. So think about it like this. The point is this. Think about applying a software update to this lab. We take it for granted as individuals, because the Macs are so easy to use, that it's really easy to pull down a software up and do it.

If you want to pull a software update to this set of Macs, we're talking about a weekend. We're talking about hours. We're talking about a huge amount of money being expended. So what our goal is, what our strategy is, where we're driving the products, is to develop an integrated suite of products and technology to simplify, automate desktop management of Apple hardware and software.

Hardware and software. That's not just desktops. That's portables. That's all the software. This is a very, very, very broad goal, and it's something I think we've done really well as part of Panther Server and Apple Remote Desktop. So let's go back and see how we actually fit in with the current products we have now relative to this management lifecycle.

So for Deploy, and we'll talk about each of these products in depth here in a second. For Deploy, we have NetBoot, the ability to NetBoot systems, do network installs. We have Manage, so you can actually set up images and actually broadcast them out there. That's one of our management solutions.

Hello. There we go. We have the Workgroup Manager, specifically managed preferences to help set up the management policies for you guys out there. And then we have Assess. You'll see the ARD, Apple Remote Desktop, actually covers all of these because it touches each one of these. It's a very different tool than the Panther server because it's a box and it's a separate application. But it's something that we feel that covers all of these different sectors. So, click.

There we go. So let's get into some specifics. NetBoot and network installation. This is part of Panther server. I know a lot of you probably already are very familiar with NetBoot. For those of you who are not, the basic building blocks of NetBoot are images, disk images. There are specific images for NetBoot and specific images for network install. Let's talk about each one of those after I have some water. Okay.

So, two flavors. Same technology, two different flavors of this. First, we have Network Install. The way I think of Network Install, I think of it as sort of a poor man's software update. The idea here is you actually build images, put in whatever arbitrary software operating systems you want into it, and allow the user to actually do installs over the network.

Something to remember about NetBoot is it's for the wire. It's not something that's for wireless, because these are big images, right? We've got operating systems in here. You've got applications in here. So, that's Network Install. NetBoot, slightly different flavor. Again, some of you know this. NetBoot is centralized boot images.

What does that mean? What that means is it's actually booting up off the server from a NetBoot image. There's actually nothing being stored except for a swap file in the local machine. So, that sounds nice and handy, but why would I really want to actually do that? It's really useful for, for example, a network. For lab situations, go back to the guy in that slide, right?

With NetBoot, what you get each time is you boot up from the machine, and you get the exact same system. So, if you've got a hostile user out there, and he or she does some things to the machine, next time you reboot to a NetBoot system, you actually get the exact same system. So, it's really handy for the lab situation, kiosk, and that sort of thing.

So some examples, some real-world examples of network install, again, as I already mentioned. Pushing OS updates out, pushing out applications, pushing out whatever disk images you want in network install. Full updates, partial updates for all the Apple hardware. And you can actually do it with ARD. You can actually use the machine to actually, as you see here on the Apple Remote Desktop shortly, you can actually change the startup disk to actually reboot from a different image. And you can actually do that. Or the system or the users can actually update at their own convenience.

For NetBoot, again, zero administration. You don't have to do anything. You have this one image on a server, and you don't have to worry about your machines because you know they're always going to be in the exact same state. is a great example of how to use NetBoot. You could have a different boot image for different departments, marketing, engineering. Or another thing you could do with a new feature that we put into this release, we have a diskless NetBoot, where there's absolutely no storage on the machine.

And that would be really handy for, say, if you want to deploy a network diagnostic image, where you can actually have a diskless NetBoot and actually not have anything on the machine. So that would be something to be really handy. So another use of NetBoot would be network diagnostic and repair.

So what did we do in Panther? We did a lot. We changed a lot. For those of you, again, familiar with Netboot, setting up a Netboot environment has been complex in the past. So our first goal was to really simplify the setup and the configuration of Netboot servers.

And I'm going to show that to you in a second. The other thing is you've got all these images. These are big images. And you've got to do a lot of things to them. And there's more software coming out. So we had this tool called the Network Image Utility, which is a simple tool.

We've completely rewritten the Network Image Utility as part of Panther Server to be something which is much more geared at managing images. Managing meaning I've got new images. I want to update images. I want to edit images. I want to sync them with other sources. I want to create-- I want to clone volumes. We've added all of that to the Network Image Utility. I'm going to show you some of that here in a second.

So here's a screenshot of the NetBoot server. This is actually the images pane. You can see it's very similar to all the other server admin plugins that we have here. We'll actually show this to you in a demo in a couple minutes. So I'm actually just going to blow by this.

As you can see, simplified user interface, server admin, very familiar. Anyone who's using server admin is going to be able to use the NetBoot piece because it's all the same UI. As I mentioned, we added another feature, which is Dysos NetBoot. That means that there's nothing being stored on the machine that's doing the NetBoot. And also we've provided Netboot over HTTP as well.

Network Image Utility. For those of you familiar with the other one, this is a brand new one. We've completely redone it. We've rewritten it completely in Cocoa. What you're seeing here is a list of all the images that you have in a local machine when you fire up the NIU. And actually, we're going to show this to you in a second.

[Transcript missing]

So, like I said, we've already been in Cocoa. We've given you the ability to actually walk through and create these images, make it easier for you to understand what you need to do. A feature that was really popular is we now have the ability to clone existing volumes. So here's a great idea. You sit down, you configure the system however you want, use the network image utility to actually clone the volume, create an image out of that. It's a really handy way to actually set it up.

Another thing that you'll see is we actually give the ability to import and export images from the NIU. Remember, these are big things. These can be huge files, right? So we actually, within it, you actually have the ability to actually import and export over there. And another thing that we've been asked for is the ability to put post-install scripts.

So one of the things you can do is actually, if we can't do something for you, you can put an arbitrary script that does some set of things, some other setup that we haven't thought of in there as well. So that's built right into the NIU. Let's take a look at these guys. Nice and fast. OK. So here we are in Panther Server. And we're going to fire up the new NIU.

Okay. So what you're seeing here, these are just some images we put together for this demo. These are the different images that I have here. You can see here these are all in this local volume here. I'm trying to give them useful names. So here we have the Jaguar latest NetInstall image.

We've got a Panther raw. Maybe I have a couple different images that I want to have here. The idea is you've got a whole listing here, which is sortable and by the last modified date, and you can actually use this to actually get an idea of what images you have on this machine.

All right, just going quickly across the toolbar. The two basic types of images we have are NetInstall and NetBoot, so you can click on these to actually do that. We'll actually do that in one second. You can edit the image from here as well. I'm not going to do that right now. And as I mentioned, you can import and export as well. So let's see here. What do we want to do?

So we're going to go ahead and actually just start to network, creating a network install here. Let's see here. Let's call this-- Demo, WWDC, we'll give it an ID. Another thing, another feature that we add in here is the description, right? So what was in that image that I called image 27ab? I have no idea. This is the Panther image. Please don't touch. So you can actually put that description in there and put a little more content in there.

So what I'm going to do here, and I'm actually not going to do this because this would take a very long time, but just to give you a feel for it, is we're actually, what we do here is we're actually going to clone this volume. What I have here is I have a Macintosh, I have this partition right here that I want to clone.

But there's another thing I want to do. I noticed there was this keynote update that I wanted to add as well. So this is how easy it is to actually go and create this. So I'll go ahead and I'm going to pull this package that I've already, already sat here. Hello. You waking up there?

Maybe not. There we go. I'm going to go ahead and add that. Okay. Now, I'm not going to actually do this right now because, again, it would take too long. But what I've just done here is I'm now creating a network install image from a partition. I'm adding another package at the end. I could add another post install script. I click create and I actually see it actually create. One nice thing for you guys out there who want to know what's going on. Excuse me.

There's an actual log here. The old NIU didn't have anything there. It was just taken away. You can see the log here. You can actually see the tools that we're using in the operating system to create this. So if you want to do it yourself, just take a look at the log. So that's the NIU. Network image utility. Let's see here. Okay. So the other thing I wanted to show you guys is the server administrator.

[Transcript missing]

Glad to hear that. Good feedback. OK, so here we are. As I mentioned, there's a lot of different pieces to NetBoot to get it setting up and running. So here's the overview. You can actually see what you need to get going. You've got NFS running. You've got AFP going. Take a look at the logs here. Show me the logs. Tell me what's going on. Clients that have booted from this. There's no one actually booted from this, so we don't actually have anything in here yet.

And here we're getting to the setting. This is really the meat of setting up the server. What you're seeing here is that I'm bound to an Ethernet port. I can say why I want the client data and the images stored for this particular server. But really the meat of what you're going to be doing is, managing what images you have from the server. So here we are. Again, you'll see, exactly like the NIU, this is a list of images that I have on the server here.

I've enabled a net boot as a default image. So if you hold the N key down, this is the image that will come from this server, right? But we don't want to do a network install, because that'd start installing stuff on someone's machine. Again, you can enable here as well. Excuse me. And also, if you want to do diskless, this is where you'd be setting this as well, as well as setting which protocol you want it to be served over. So with this configured like this, the process of actually firing up the servers is pretty simple.

You click Start. And you wait a second. And you wait one more second. There we go. NetBoot's being served up right now. Really simple, really easy to use interface for a very complex problem that we're trying to solve. Okay. So that's it for the demo. Let's back to slides.

Okay, thank you. Easy to use, NetBoot. You've got to love it. Okay, Managed Desktop, the other second of our two management technologies. I want to jump back to something I started with a little while ago. We've got a variety of people out here with five machines and 35,000 machines.

The fact of the matter is each of you has a very unique management policy. Some of you, like I said, just want to control the username and the password. Some of you want absolute control over it because you're education and you don't want your students having access to network resources or maybe some of the system preferences. What Managed Desktop does for us is, for those of you who've attended some of the directory sessions, what Managed Desktop does is it gives us the ability to... Managed Desktop does for us is it gives us the ability to manage the preferences on these client machines.

What happens is, via directory services, we actually pull down these managed preferences to a local machine, and then the operating system uses those preferences as the preferences for that machine. Important point here. When these preferences are pulled down via open directory, they're cached. So we've got these portables out here, these portables that may or may not be actually on the network.

So the nice thing about this is that we can actually use these portables to manage the preferences on the machine. The other nice thing is that these preferences that you'll be setting in WorkRouteManager, and we'll be showing you this in one second, are actually going to follow these portables around. That's really handy. The other nice thing, as you'll see in the WorkRouteManager, is we have a very flexible way to define a set of policies. This is because all of you, each one of you, has a very, very different set, has a different policy.

So you can set policy for computers, sets of computers in a lab. You can set policies, preferences for groups. So I've got this group of students, or I've got this group of employees. So you can set those preferences that you need to set in certain preferences. Or you can set it on an individual user basis. All of those preferences, when you set those, and then pull down the machine, are composites. So I can set them up here at the computer list, in the group, and in the user.

So, and again, as I mentioned, it's designed to support portable hardware. One thing that I'll show you here shortly, and I know this is coming up in a lot of the sessions, one of the things that we've added as part of Managed Desktop and Workgroup Manager is mobile accounts. Has everyone heard of this yet?

Okay. So what mobile accounts are, what this does is using this Managed Desktop technology, it actually gives you the ability, when you set an account as mobile, to actually cache the account, cache the user name, as well as the network credentials. This means that if I set up the user to actually do it with a mobile account, this means that if I, when I first log in, my credentials are pulled down, my accounts are pulled down, they're saved locally. When I disconnect from the network, I can still log in with the exact same network password, right? So you IT folks out there who always want one's password for each computer, each person, this is a great feature for you guys.

So, Managed Desktop. Provide standardized desktop configurations. Give the ability to manage system preferences. Control access to hardware, to software, to network resources. The ability to automatically provide network com directories, control the desktop, automatically launch applications that log in. There's a lot of pieces to this. So, what we're going to do, what we did as part of Panther was a managed desktop was something which we introduced as part of Jaguar and continue to support.

So, we want to continue to refine the technology. Additionally, there's new preferences which have landed as part of Panther. So, we need to extend it to actually support those. And we want stronger support for portables because there's a lot of you out there, a lot of your hardware out there is going to be portables. And if you want to manage it, the technology needs to support you.

So let's quickly go down the list of managed preferences that we actually manage. And I'll go through these pretty quickly. Application access. Which applications do you want them to be actually able to manage? Managing the classic environment, when you want it to start up, dock behavior, how it shows up. Basically, everything you can do within normal system preferences.

A new one as of Panther is the Energy Saver settings. You lab guys out there, you've got labs that you want to start up at 9 o'clock and you want to shut down at 10 p.m. With this managed desktop, this feature that's new Energy Saver settings is now managed. So you're going to be able to do that in your labs as well, which is a really popular feature. Thank you.

finder behavior. Internet preferences. Careful. This isn't in Panther. Why is this still listed here? Remember, not everyone is going to Panther tomorrow, right? Maybe they will. Who knows? This is a preference which is something which is in Jaguar. Managed preferences needs to manage machines that are in Jaguar as well as Panther.

So what you're going to see when you look at our preferences for managed desktop is it's going to be a union. It's going to be the full set of them so you can continue to manage your Panther machines just like you're managing your Jaguar machines. Full backward compatibility.

Login items, auto-launching applications, media access, control the media. This is another popular thing in education. You don't want them burning a lot of CDs, so you just turn off the CD player. Mobile accounts, which we already talked about, the ability to actually cache an account that follows you around.

Printer access quotas, and then management assistant preferences. Maybe I don't want people to get to the accounts button. So using this-- and actually, I'll show you this in the demo-- you can actually turn this off, or whatever preferences you want not available in system preferences. So let's do that. Let's actually show this off. OK. Workgroup Manager.

For the sake of simplicity, what I'm going to do here is I'm actually going to just edit locally. So I'm not editing an LDAP server here. What I'm doing is editing a local NetInfo database just for simplicity's sake. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to create a group. And this is going to be a new group.

I'm going to call it WWDC Lab. Lab 1. Go ahead and save that sucker. All right. So for the lab, let's see, what do I want to do to this guy? For the lab, I'm a very smart IT guy. And I know that if you put the doc on the right, huge productivity gain. So I'm going to force everybody in my lab to have the doc on the right. Because I can't. All right.

Okay, so quickly, just to go quick for these settings here that we have here, what you can do for each of the settings that we're going through, you can have it not managed. You can have once. Once, the difference between once and always is really extremely relevant. Once means that this setting is pulled down once, and it's sort of a breadcrumb. You're trying to help out your user by setting up something so it's easy for them to get around their desktop. They can then change it.

Always means it's always. They can't touch it. And for this, I'm going to make it always. So here we go. Dock on the right. Good luck. All right, so what we just did there is we set the dock to the right so anybody within this group is going to get their dock on the right. All right.

Let's go ahead and create a user as well and show sort of, we'll show accounts. There we go. Show actually compositing of preferences as well. So I'm going to create a new character. Let's call Rans. All right, so we'll go ahead and we'll make Rans. He's probably going to need a password. Give him a name and a password.

[Transcript missing]

All right. So, Ranj is sort of a sketchy character, so what we're going to do here is we're going to manage some of his system preferences as well. I don't want him to have account access, and I don't want him to have expose because it's just too cool and he's not a cool guy. Okay.

Okay. So we'll go ahead and we'll apply that. And what we're going to do is we're actually going to log in to log in as RANS on this machine here. So shut this down. And we'll log out. No, we'll really log out.

[Transcript missing]

And there we see it.

Doc on the right. Hugely productive rams. So, thank you. What you'll see here is actually you can't change it. This is not -- it's because we made this a forced preference on here. It's set to always. When you go and you take a look at what he can get to, you can't get to expose.

Oh, my God, what's he going to do? And you can't get to accounts as well. So this is a really trivial example. But you get the idea if you have multiple workgroups or lots of users or computer lists that it's really easy to actually set these up and deploy them to your users.

You're going to want to know about mobile accounts because it seems to be a very popular topic. I would direct you toward the session tomorrow at 9:00, developing for managed networks. No. Is that right? 9:00 session. And they're actually going to be demoing it there tomorrow so you can actually see that at work. So let's log back in as admin.

And leave this for the next demo. OK, back to slides, please. OK, so that was Managed Desktop. OK, last of the three. Apple Remote Desktop. So this is very different than the two technologies we just talked about today, we already talked about. It's a separate product. It's why there's a box. There's a big difference between these technologies, this product and the technology we just talked about, because Apple Remote Desktop is more of a real-time technology. It's a separate product to actually do things in real-time of the now, as I would like to think of it.

One of the key features with Apple Remote Desktop is the ability to use it on not just one machine, but actually to broadcast to multiple machines. That's a big differentiator. As I mentioned, it's a separate product from Panther Server, and it's really ideal for small to medium-sized deployments of Macs.

Let's take a look at what we've got going on here. So this is a sample screenshot of an Apple Remote Desktop. What you're looking at is up in the bottom here, we've got a list of the machines that we're interacting with. Over here on the right, we're doing a multi-observe, looking at four machines at the same time, something maybe you want to do in a classroom if you're monitoring what your students are doing. There's a sending a text message, and that at the top is actually a report that's been generated against this. We're actually going to do a live demo of this in a second, so let's talk a little bit about how you're going to use Apple Remote Desktop.

System management, copying files, moving applications, that's more of the software distribution. System management, making sure that you've got the right machines, doing profiling against them, doing remote assistance, doing actual interaction with these machines via screen sharing. System profiling is one other big thing. We're doing asset management. And software distribution, again, installing packages over the network, doing all sorts of things. It's the Swiss Army knife.

That's what I always think about Apple Remote Desktop. There's a huge amount of things you can do that. And when you sit down and you take a look at it, there's just a huge amount of what I call management verbs that you can do with this application. And we're going to show you a bunch of those in a second.

First, what did we do with ARD or Apple Remote Desktop this year? First off, we had two releases this year. We had the Apple Remote Desktop 1.2 release, which was out last March. An incremental release, but we did add some key new features. The ability to set the network startup disk.

Again, utilizing NetBoot and NetworkInstall, the ability to do that so you can quickly repurpose a large set of machines to a different disk image. Remote software installation, the ability to broadcast packages to a large set of machines, as well as make it really easy to auto-update prior versions on the network. That was one release. There's another release. So we actually did something with Panther. And those of you who have gotten your CD, you've installed it and taken a look at it, in the sharing panel, there's a new little checkbox.

Apple Remote Desktop. What did we do? Did we give you a free copy of ARD, Apple Remote Desktop? Actually, what we did, there's two pieces to Apple Remote Desktop. There's the agent. Those of you familiar with the product, there's the agent. What we've done, there's the agent and there's the administrator. The administrator's the console that you look at.

What we've done, is we've built the agent into Panther. The number one complaint people had about Apple Remote Desktop is it's hard to configure. I've got to go visit every single machine, install the agent, make sure everything's in. It's built in. Every Panther server and and every version of Panther has this built into the product.

So you click-- well, we'll actually show it to you in a second. So what I'm going to do now is I'm actually going to bring Chris Sorman. He's the Apple Remote Desktop Engineering Manager. Welcome. So what we're going to do here is we're actually going to do a little scenario.

We're an IT administrator, and we're actually going to do some management of our machines. Let's go ahead and fire up ARD, Apple Remote Desktop. Chris is going to go ahead and add four machines. We have a wide variety. We have a 17-inch PowerBook, a 15-inch, a tangerine, we have a lot of hardware. He's going to go ahead and add those machines.

So let's first, what we want to do is let's say we've got a problem with one of these machines. So let's go ahead and actually control one of these machines.

[Transcript missing]

So the first question is going to be, well, what if I've got 30 machines that I'm observing? So when you get to more than four machines, what you actually do is you'll start cycling through them.

So if there were six there, you'd get one, two, three, four, and then it'd cycle to the next two as well. One of the nice features that we put into ARD 1.2 was the ability to actually jump in and actually look at one of these machines. Click on that, boom, you're right there. And then pull it back. Great.

Okay, so I'm sort of a finicky IT guy, and I like my machine names to be a certain way. And right now they're all set to, it looks like, English Lab. Actually, I'm going to give it a different name. But again, we've got to be thinking about multiple machines here. So what we're going to do here is we're actually going to give it a new name.

is the founder of Mathlab. Oh, that's right, it's in Mathlab now. I forgot completely. What you see here is happening is he just typed in Mathlab. And each of them just actually auto-incremented. And he did a massive change of all the names right there. But again, be thinking about 20 machines. Be thinking about 50 machines here. So next up, we're going to do a little asset management. I'm going to go ahead and do a system info report against these four machines.

[Transcript missing]

So there he goes. You just do it to a known format. It's just out to the desktop. There you go. Right there. Again, four machines, but imagine if this was 400. You've just done all of this work from a single machine. Well, next thing we're going to do is actually, we're going to actually push some bits onto these machines. Chris has a thing called Developer Essentials on this machine right here. What he's going to do is he's actually going to go ahead and deploy this set of information to these machines.

What you saw there is he just dragged and dropped it to the set of machines. It's asking him right now about where he wants to put it. And it's the same relative location. And there it goes. Aha, it's already there, so we're going to replace the ones that are there. And it's going and starting to copy them.

[Transcript missing]

So next thing we're going to do, one of the things we have is there's a lot of software updates coming out all the time. And one of the things you want to do is you want to take these software updates, you want to push them out to a set of machines. So what Chris is going to do now is he's going to fire a software update up, and he's going to pull down a small update.

[Transcript missing]

is going to actually move it onto these machines using one of the new features in Apple Remote Desktop 1.2. So what he's going to go ahead and do, after he moves it into the finder, is he's actually going to go ahead... When he gets to Apple desktop, eventually. There we go.

Okay, so one of the new features is actually install a package. So again, 50 machines, 100 machines. What we want to do here is actually going to do an install there. Keep an eye on the status. First off, it's copying it, it's broadcasting out to all the machines.

[Transcript missing]

I'm guessing those are the iBooks? The iBooks. Okay.

[Transcript missing]

Still going. Is that one still installing? All done. Is that the tangerine? Okay. I'm going to go ahead and reboot. You're going to hear this noise here that I'm sure is going to be very familiar.

coming offline. And sounds good. So what we did there is we just did, again, a small example of doing some management with ARD, Apple Remote Desktop, and showed off some of the verbs that we have built into the system. There's a bunch more, and I encourage you to take a look at that. And it should be a lot easier for you to do so because we actually built the agent in. So thank you, Chris.

Okay, so that was the Apple Remote Desktop demo. Keep your eye on this space. There's lots of fun things happening in this space. So, wrap up. This is a holy grail demo that I would have loved to give you guys if we had the time to actually be able to do it.

What I would have loved to do is actually pull a, do what you all do all day, is pull a new machine out of a box, set it up, hold down the N key, have an automatically network install that I've built previously, start to install automatically, have the network, have everything set up on that machine for you, so that you don't have to do anything other than hold down the N key.

So when the user actually gets a machine, they fire it up, they're just sitting there at their login window, they can use their name and password, and you didn't have to do anything other than build that one image for them. I think that would be a really compelling demo, and I think one of the things that you should know now is that using these technologies, you have the ability to do that. So, key points that we have.

I think what we're doing is we're working on the best tools and technologies to manage Macintosh hardware. I think what we're showing off here today is we're showing off that they're designed for flexibility. Because again, all of you, 35,000, all of you have a different management policy and we need to be able to provide tools and technologies for you to be able to do that. And again, these are built in to Panther and Panther Server. So it's already out there and I encourage you to give them a try.

Just so you know, there's a lot of other sessions which actually support us. Directory services relative to managed desktop is really important. I realize a lot of these may have already occurred. So I encourage you to look at the slides or review these. Building applications for managed networks. We'll be showing off mobile accounts on that tomorrow.

That's tomorrow morning at 9:00 AM. Authentication. Again, this already occurred. So I encourage you to look at the slides or review these. Building applications for managed networks. We'll be showing off mobile accounts on that tomorrow. That's tomorrow morning at 9:00 AM. Authentication. Again, this already occurred. occurred, but it's something I encourage you to take a look at.

Here's our contact information if you want to come find us. Here's some great resources of resources up there. What I'd like to do now is I'd like to invite some of the rest of the team up here to actually come up here and answer some questions for us.
