---
Title:  The Pro in QuickTime Pro
Year:   2003
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2003/703/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Thanks, Amy. Good morning, everybody. It's going to take me a couple of minutes to get used to my voice over the speakers and also being in front of so many people with so much light going on in front of me. The session is relatively packed with stuff. I was just talking to Amy about being able to fit it in the amount of time that we have in here. I hope that we can do that in time. The session talks about QuickTime Pro. I'd like to know, first of all, who has not purchased QuickTime Pro? Who has not purchased QuickTime Pro?

Nobody. One person over there, kind of like, shy, going, no. OK, so everybody, or most of you guys have purchased QuickTime Pro. Have you guys actually been working with QuickTime Pro in terms of doing maybe minor editing to your movies and that kind of thing? Well, that's definitely some of the things that we're going to talk in this session.

Another thing that I want to talk in this session is-- Using QuickTime Pro in a professional workflow. Now last year I made a presentation at QuickTime Live similar to this one where the motto was going free or going really cheap and trying to produce media with just the 30 bucks that you put into QuickTime Pro. And this year the motto is quite different.

This year is you've got QuickTime Pro, you've got Final Code Pro, you've got Live Stage Pro, you've got all of the Pro apps, you've got DVD Studio Pro, and I guess that some of it is is talking about my experience with QuickTime Pro. I often tend to gravitate to QuickTime Pro to do minor things instead of having to boot up Final Code Pro, wait for the whole thing to bounce on my power book.

I just do it in QuickTime Pro, go off, go off really quickly. So that's kind of like the idea of this session. I'm still going to talk about the typical minor editing features of QuickTime Pro. And another thing that I do want to cover today is the deployment side.

Where you can use QuickTime Pro to compress stuff. I'm going to talk about it briefly. But some of the other relatively obscure sections of exporting, which some of them have to do with QuickTime VR. I don't know if anybody has used QuickTime VR or exported any QuickTime VR. Has anybody actually exported QuickTime VR for QuickTime Pro? Okay, a few of you. So hopefully it will be a surprise for others. There's also a section that I want to talk about.

A DVD Studio Pro situation. Anybody using DVD Studio Pro? A bunch of you. That's great. Perfect. And I'm sure that you have seen this. So this is what you guys will be learning in, hopefully, in today's presentation. The model was also produced, developed, and delivered. That's also been for QuickTime Live. And that's kind of like the structure that I have here.

Now, QuickTime is, as you guys know, people think of QuickTime as video and sound. But it's a bunch of other things. There's QuickTime VR, there's Flash, there's graphics in QuickTime, extensibility via third party components like Axle or which other one I can think of. Flash, for example, is a component of QuickTime. It's part of the Mac OS, which is really, really important.

And to tell you the truth, I don't know why I put this thing at the very bottom of the slide. It should be at the very top, but it is cross-platform. And that's one of the major, major things about QuickTime in relationship to other platforms like Windows Media and Rio. Even though the other guys are cross-platform, they certainly do not compete in the cross-platform ability when it comes to QuickTime. QuickTime is almost identical on both platforms.

So QuickTime is at the core of the OS, and this is a slide that was released when Apple presented for the first time the beta or the announcement of OS X. And the reason why I'm using this slide is because at the bottom of the screen it has QuickTime, which is pretty much at the OS level. Now this is very important.

On one side is one of the most important things about QuickTime, and on the other side is one of the most difficult things to deal with QuickTime. The important thing is being in the OS level. That means that the developers can write an application without actually having to deal with codecs or deal much with codecs and actually dealing with so many media types. On the other hand, the thing that is sometimes negative is that the user must have QuickTime install to be able to watch your content.

Now the next one is, what is QuickTime Pro? And I'm certain that most of you know that QuickTime Pro, pretty much when you buy the $30 license, you unlock the pro features of QuickTime, which for the most part, unlock the editing capabilities and a bunch of other capabilities in the QuickTime player. Now, how many of you knew that when you buy the license of QuickTime Pro, you actually unlock capabilities of preview? Anybody knew that? Nobody knew that? Yes, you knew that.

And I think it also unlocks the capabilities of the Windows application called Picture Viewer, I think. It's the name. And QuickTime, as most other people think of QuickTime as a player, like, not you guys, but your clients or your customers. And it's not a QuickTime player. It is the QuickTime player. It is the plug-in. It's a huge architecture under the hood at the OS level. And surprisingly enough, preview is part of QuickTime Pro. I like that one because not many people know that.

So the Pro features of when you buy the license of QuickTime Pro, it unlocks these capabilities of the player. And it allows you to, the first thing that it allows you to do is to import media into QuickTime Pro, modify it, and export it. So it has support for over 200 media types. There's a few of those on the screen. You guys know that. I'm going to flip over here relatively quickly because I have so much to cover. So if I can get the PowerBook, please.

The first thing that I'm going to do is a very, very, very simple example. And you guys saw this page yesterday on Apple's site. And I don't know if anybody is like me. I'm a total geek, so I tend to deconstruct things. And the first thing that I deconstruct is like, oh, is that a QuickTime movie or what the hell is that?

Well, it's actually an image. It's a GIF or GIF image, depending on which part of the world you come from. But check out what I'm going to do. I'm sure that some of you have done this. I'm going to open it in a new window. I'm going to copy the URL of the image. And I'm going to go to the QuickTime player.

Sorry, I may be doing this too fast. So, whoa, whoa, whoa, wrong application. I'm on the QuickTime player, and you can get file open URL in a new player, and I'm just gonna paste the URL, which I had done earlier. And as you can see, it's a GIF or a GIF, whatever you call them. You click OK, and the QuickTime player will open up the image. Now, it doesn't play over here.

That's basically because I'm not playing it. But if I play it, you get to see the, The reason why this thing is really cool is because you can reuse media that was deployed somewhere else. For example, in this case, I wouldn't do this because of the whole copyright issue, but I could take that image and put it around my computer.

[Transcript missing]

Now another typical thing that a number of you guys have done, and a number of people want to do when they get to QuickTime, is make a slideshow or turn a bunch of images into a linear video or into a linear movie. And in this case, what I have here is a bunch of pictures that I took of stop animation outside of my window.

And it's, I don't know, I think something like two minutes in between the pictures or 45 seconds. I don't remember. But in this case, I have 75 pictures in the stop animation or in the stop capture. And what I'm going to do is I'm just going to import them into one linear movie, which is just going file. There's this thing called open image sequence. And QuickTime Pro tends to be quite smart.

By selecting just the first picture, as long as they're sequentially named, you can open up a sequence. So in this case, it asks you at what frame rate you want to open up the image. So if you render, for example, 3D out of 3D Max or whatever 3D application, and you just got a series of images at 30 frames per second or 29, 97 frames per second or whatever, you can just choose the frame rate from here. Surprisingly enough, there's no other field. But anyway, most of the frame rates are there. In this particular case, I'm going to use 10 frames per second because the duration of the slides. Otherwise, it would just fly over.

And we'll be able to see the image sequence. Another thing that I should warn you at this point is that I'm going to be opening a bunch of images and a bunch of documents. I'm going to keep them on the window or on the desktop, and I'm going to come back to them, refer to them.

So hopefully I won't be messing with your mind so much. And so here's the animation. The images are, in this particular case, 640 by 480, which is what I got from my camera. And when you play them, it's actually playing the stop animation. So that's how the clouds move that particular day. You're going to see a boat going by.

Yeah, that was a sunny day in Vancouver, so you got to take pictures on that day. Otherwise it goes away and then it rains and it rains and it rains. Okay, so I'm going to leave that one over there. Actually, I'm going to hide it. The next example is opening Flash media. And this is kind of an important thing, because again, coming back to the idea of working with professional tools, not just the free tools.

How many of you guys are actually working with Flash media and deploying Flash video, for example, with MX or a few of you guys? Well, in this particular case, what I have here is a very basic Flash controller. I'm not going to bother to open up the FLA document. I'm actually going to open up the Swift.

And the way I'm going to do it is just by dragging the Swift into QuickTime Player. Now, this particular Swift is a Flash 5 version. And this is a very, very important thing. QuickTime is one version behind Flash. So QuickTime 6 has support for Flash 5. So if you have a Flash MX document and has MX-only features, it will not open in QuickTime 6. Hopefully the Apple guys will be able to catch up with that.

But for the time being, that's not the case. And what I have here is just a controller that, as you can imagine, kind of like the Julia Childs thing. It's already pre-cooked to match the same duration as my slideshow. And when you click on the play button, it plays when you pause and rewind. And that's just the action scripting being in the Flash document.

As you can imagine, what I'm going to do later is I'm going to marry this thing to the slideshow. But I'm going to leave it there. Right now, what I want to point out is the fact that I'm opening. The Flash document with its different states and its timeline in the QuickTime player.

Now, another thing is opening text in QuickTime, which is yet another one of those 200 media types that QuickTime supports. And if you drag a text document into the QuickTime player, the QuickTime player doesn't like it. I don't know if you guys can see at the bottom of the screen, but the QuickTime player is not highlighting. But if this is an OS X thing, it's not a QuickTime thing, it's an OS X thing. If you drag and press on the Option and Apple key, that means force open.

So if I drag and open, you can see the QuickTime player, the tiny QuickTime player, I see some of you kind of going like this. It's highlighting, so when I let go, it's actually going to force open the text document in the QuickTime player. I could have just gone file, open, select the document, and navigate through my nightmare of hierarchy to get the document. Just drag and drop, or Option, Apple, drag and drop, would actually force opening the document.

And in this particular case, it's just a text document in Spanish, so I'm going to just go ahead and do that. One of the things is that if you take a look at the document itself, each one of the lines will be a sample, and that sample will have a duration of two seconds. So that's how QuickTime interprets text.

And I need to close that one. Now if I could go over to the slides, please. I'm going to keep on going with the slides. And as you can see, we've done a few-- Importing into QuickTime Pro. So this is the part that I called What was the motto again? The first word? Develop. Develop. So this is where the developing part comes in. So if I can just switch over to the PowerPoint slides, please, or to the keynote slides, rather, on the screen.

Thank you very much. And as you can see, these are the ways that I went over to drag and open media in the QuickTime Player. There's a bunch of ways that you can do that. And of course, QuickTime will support the 200 and so documents and media types.

Now another thing that I wanted to talk about is the movie properties window. This movie properties window is a very powerful window. It has a really, to tell you the truth, obscure interface, I believe, but the way I use it is to learn, and to learn from somebody else. So if I could switch over back to the PowerBook, please.

This is a real life example. It's a real life that I'm going to have to do as soon as I get back to Vancouver. I compressed these movies for a non-profit organization Which, they're making this really neat, really neat conspiracy thing. But I compressed them in December of last year. And just before I flew over here, they sent me an email if I could compress the movies for their final edit, or for their new version. And what happened is that I lost my cleaner settings.

This thing was compressed in Cleaner 6, and I lost the settings that I used back then. So now I need to grab my settings. Instead of trying to fiddle around with my settings again, I can actually use what the engineers call the GINFO window. In the old days, it used to be the info window. Now it's called the movie properties window, which is Apple J. And with the properties window, you can learn a ton about your movie. In this particular case, I'm interested in learning what codec I use, what settings I use, frame rate, data rate, window size, everything.

So I can replicate those settings again. And if you could look at the movies here. This is a world full of laughter. It's just a few seconds. It looks quite nice. This is the 288 kilobit per second version. And I don't remember my settings. And it's true. I really don't.

I think it's in the general section? No. General section will tell you the data rate and the file size. Now I've got the video track selected. So now I can see that the data rate of this movie is 31.1 kilobytes per second. Now, Cleaner doesn't like kilobytes. Well, the default setting in Cleaner is kilobits per second.

So to figure out what I used in Cleaner, I'm just going to multiply that 31.1 times 8 so I can get it into kilobits per second. And as you can see, the video has a data rate of roughly 248, 250 maybe kilobits per second. Now, what about the audio?

The audio is 4.8. So I just need to do the same deal, 4.8 times 8. And that'll be around 38. I guess my settings were around 40 kilobits per second. So now I can make a note of that, go into Cleaner, and enter those settings without having to fiddle around with the settings that I forgot.

In the video side of things, or in the video, if I go back to the video, there's also format. So as you can see, I used Sorenson Video 3. So that was the codec I used. I did not use MPEG-4. I used Sorenson Video 3. Size, 320 by 240.

So pretty much I've gathered my settings for my video to go into Cleaner. And most of the times you wouldn't be using your own movies. The way I recommend you guys doing is people ask, how the hell do you get really great quality video like the one on the QuickTime trailer?

Well, open up the movie, figure it out yourself. It's not that difficult. And one of the things that you're going to notice in those movies is that the frame rate is 24 frames per second. Watch out for that, because their source is film. This case, the source is video. So when you see 24 frames per second, that doesn't necessarily mean that you have to encode at 24 frames per second. For that, I recommend you go to Ben's sessions for the preprocessing or for the other encoding sessions.

They'll talk about frame rates. Over here, I won't talk about frame rates. So this is a real-life example of how I use the info window. And by the way, the same thing on the audio side of things. If I go to the audio track, I go format, and you can see in this particular case, also the sample rate channels and sample size, 16-bit cue design. Those are the settings that I should enter in Cleaner 5 or Cleaner 6 for the next time I encode the upcoming content. Now, who's going to do that? Who uses Live Stage Pro? Guillaume, you're the only one. I'm really surprised. You guys got to check LiveStage Pro.

There's this thing in Live Stage Pro. You guys know about Live Stage Pro. It's the authoring tool to make interactive QuickTimes. Well, I've got a very dumbed down example here of an interactive QuickTime. And it's a very dumbed down example just for this particular section of the presentation. It's a movie that has two sprites. That when you click on the year, it's actually just going to send what is called a debug stream of the year that the computer sends out. And also the QuickTime version.

Now, for those of you that are authoring, or for those of you, or actually you guys that should be authoring with LiveStage Pro, when you're doing your testing, you should be doing your testing on the user's machine or on the playback environment. You should not be using just the LiveStage Pro preview to see what you get. In this particular case, I'm going to get the preview to show you what it does. If I open up the debugger window, this is the debugger window. This is my preview. And when I click on the year, you're going to see the year appears over here.

And when I click on the QuickTime version, LiveStage Pro, or rather QuickTime, returns the version of QuickTime that I'm using, which you can use to actually make a decision of maybe showing a different video or go this way or whatever. But it's really cool to try it in LiveStage Pro where it has a debugger window. But what about if you want to play it out in your user's environment? Let's say that your movie should be playing on the QuickTime player.

Well, there's this other thing. Actually, I need to quit out of here. This is the same movie, already exported as a QuickTime movie. And if you click on it, nothing happens, because the text is supposed to be sent to the debugger window in Live Stage Pro. Over here, there is no debugger, or so you think. If I go to the GINFO window-- Check this out. If I go to my Sprite track, there's this other thing called debug messages, which is just a window that will actually show you the last debug string that you sent in Live Stage Pro.

So if I click on the year, If I click on the year, there we go, the year gets sent over there. So you can actually use this debugger window in the QuickTime player to test your movie out and to send yourself messages to see how your movie is performing. And for anybody that gets into the authoring, this is super valuable.

Most definitely. OK, if I can go back to the slides, please. So in this case, we've seen how you can use the G info window-- I love that name-- to get some information and actually to learn from somebody else's work and also to debug your work. And these are some of the things that you can learn from the GINFO window, and some of the information that we got right now.

Now, produce content. You guys know that you can edit media, that you can mix multiple media types in QuickTime. Composite media, this is a really neat one. where you can actually do compositing in real time, and main attack media. You can use the keyboard to navigate in the QuickTime timeline, in the play in the QuickTime. You can locate the playback here to whatever you want, make selections, and get time stamps, all from the keyboard.

These are the typical editing shortcuts that you would use to make selections, to copy things, to paste them around. I'm not going to show you all of them, basically, because I'm going to get more into the pro stuff. And let me show you a typical example here. If I can go back to the PowerBook. Thank you very much.

Has anybody used Squeeze version 2? No. OK. Squeeze-- and I'm saying Squeeze version 2, because I'm not sure if it was fixed in version 3. But in Squeeze 2, when you compress your movies into QuickTime or MPEG-4 into whatever, Squeeze sometimes would drop the last frame or the last two frames of your video. So if you have something really important on your last frame, you're actually going to lose that frame, or you were actually going to lose that frame in Squeeze 2.

So just to show you the really simple editing features, this is just a QuickTime movie, a DV file, that let's say needs to be compressed with Squeeze 2. And you want to just grab the last frame. What I'm going to do is I'm just going to go to the last frame.

I always get confused between these key commands. There we go. So that's the last frame. That's us flying. And pressing on the Shift key and the arrow keys on the keyboard, you can make a selection. And check this out. For those of you that use OS X, see that little selection there? I just made a selection of one frame, which I want to just duplicate.

So I got that frame selected. Copy. And I'm just going to paste it. Boom, boom. You can see here on the-- this is the actual info window now-- how the actual time of video is changing. That's because I'm adding frames over there. So now I've added a bunch of frames to the end.

I can save my movie with dependencies, take it into Squeeze, and who cares if he drops those last frames? I already put them there. So the interesting thing in here is the actual editing capabilities. Now if I could go back to the slides, please. What did I do with the clicker?

Has anybody used add and add scale? Or rather, has anybody not used add or add scale in the QuickTime player? I see a few hands here and there. OK, this is a very interesting feature, where you can actually-- in this case, what I did is I copied and pasted.

Which in QuickTime terms, when you paste media, it actually, whenever you have the timeline or the playback head, it will splice the current media and it will insert whatever you have in the clipboard. In this particular case, I was at the very end, so nothing was pushed further down. But there are cases where you actually don't want that. You actually want the media to appear on top, or rather, at the same time as the current media. You don't want to push anything in the timeline. So that's what add and add scale does.

In the QuickTime player, I'll show it to you in a sec, if you go edit add, it's just going to add the media to wherever the location of the playback head is, without changing the length of the new, of the pasted, or of the added media. Add scale on the other side is actually, what I have in this particular example is, imagine that you're copying a track, which is the green one, which has an X duration. And you want to fit it into that blue, light blue section, which is shorter.

So what you would do is you would actually select that blue section in the movie that you're adding the new one and select add scale. In that case, it's actually going to shrink the duration of the one you're adding to fit that selection, which is really cool. Now, in this particular case, be aware that the sample rate will change. So if you have a video track and the video track or an audio track and then you add scale to something smaller, it's going to accelerate and it's going to sound like the Chipmunks.

Because it's the same media in less amount of time. Or if you extend it, it's actually going to sound like this. So be aware of that. I think that was the second picture, or the second slide. So if I can go back to the, to the, to the, yeah, you got me.

Okay. Now what I have here is I've got, I already prepared this one. I don't need this movie right here. But ad track. I've got the Marina movie already compressed. I'll go over the compression later. But it comes from the one that I opened earlier. And it has the same duration as my flash track. Now, I think I have the flash track over here. And in this particular case, they both match perfectly. So for the flash track, I'm going to select Edit. Or rather, select All first. I'm going to select the whole sample.

Copy. I've got it in the clipboard. And if I go to my new movie, now I can just go-- see, there's the Add and Add Scale. If I go Add Scale right now, because I don't have anything selected except just the frame where the playback head is, it would just add the flash track to that single frame. Now, I actually didn't. Oops. I just learned something new.

Anyway, I was expecting it to just appear on the first frame, but in this case, it actually appeared on the whole timeline, which is exactly what I wanted. As you can see, it matches perfectly from the beginning to the end. So this is the example of an ad track. So now if I play-- remember, this flash had ActionScript to actually play the timeline. Pause a timeline, rewind a timeline. So the flash track is actually controlling the whole QuickTime player, which is really neat.

and I'll talk about the compositing later, but you can see right now I have the flash on top of the video, which is not exactly what I want. But I'll come back to that in a few minutes when we get into the compositing section. So if I could go back to the slides, please.

There's another situation, typical situation, where you have video captured from an analog source, or even from a DV source, and you have noise on the edges of the screen, black lines or video noise. In analog video, you would get terrible noise at the bottom of the screen. And when you compress your video, you don't want those black lines in there. You don't want that noise, because you're wasting bandwidth, and you're actually distracting your audience from that added noise.

Well, if you have cleaner, if you have squeeze, you can actually crop those things. But there are cases where you may want to just crop those things in a movie that has already been compressed, or even compress the movie in the QuickTime player, if you so like. For example, if you want to use the MPEG-4 codec.

Now for that particular example, if I could just jump back to the PowerBook, please. What I have is I have the same DV movie. Which, I don't know if you noticed, but it does have terrible noise around it. This black lines. And when she exits the plane, this black lines, they just get really nasty.

So I'm going to remove those black lines. So if I can go back to the slide so I can explain first what I'm going to do. Thank you very much. What I'm going to do is I'm going to generate a black image, or actually in this case I already generated a black image which is slightly smaller.

Actually, it's not smaller. It's the exact same size of the document, and it's not only black. It's black and white. The white areas are the ones that are going to be removed or cropped. And the black areas of this mask image are the ones that are going to be kept.

So this, I've done that in Photoshop. The way I did it is I took a screenshot of my QuickTime movie, took it into Photoshop, and that's where I measure the black area. So if you see this document in Photoshop, it's a black and white document that has the black area covering the area that I do want to keep in the video. And I'm going to go and set the mask in the QuickTime player.

And this is what it's going to look like. So if I can go back to the PowerBook, I'm going to show you how to do that. So I've got my noisy movie here. I've got my mask that was opened up, but it was made in Photoshop. And you're going to see that I've got the white area over here and the black area in the center. This has been already measured to-- To remove the black lines. And in this particular case, it's a PIC document. So here's how you do it. Again, back in the movie properties window, so-called GINFO window.

I'm going to affect the video track. And there's this thing called mask, one of the properties of the video track. Right now, the whole thing is set to black, which means show the whole screen. But in this case, I actually want to just show a smaller section of-- The video, which was defined by my black areas. You can see the movie behind. It actually changed size, and the black noise is all gone.

So now I can compress this video without getting that noise. You can do that same thing. You can do the cropping in your encoding tool, like Cleaner, or Squeeze, or HipFlix, or whatever other tool you use. So that's a very simple example of masking. I'm going to leave that movie over there. And I need to go back to the slides, I think. If I could go back to the keynote presentation, please. Thank you very much. Now there's this other thing where you can actually use graphic modes to control what gets displayed on the screen.

And I'm going to go back to the PowerBook, please. And in this particular case, what I've got is-- The Flash and the video. Now, if you select, you can see I've got the video track and the flash track. Now, Flash, this is a great feature of Flash that most people maybe don't know about, but it has the ability, or rather by default, it has an alpha channel that removes the background.

And QuickTime Player gives you access to the graphics mode, what is called the graphics mode, as to how the flash track is going to be rendered. And I'm just going to use the straight alpha. And as you can see, the background of the flash track disappears quite nicely.

Now I should remind you that this is quite CPU intensive because of the real time compositing that QuickTime Player is doing. Now, something a little bit more interesting. Maybe you guys know about this, and you have done that. But what about this? Got a QuickTime VR here. It's got a bunch of nodes. You can see the nodes over there.

Oh, I miss Mexico. And I also have this other document in Photoshop. You see that little logo? It has transparency. It's actually saved as a PNG document, as a PNG. So I have it over here saved as a PNG document. I'm going to open it in the QuickTime Player.

For some reason, I don't know why the QuickTime Player does that. It looks awful, but that's not the way it's going to look like after I apply the transparency. I'm going to select all, copy, or edit copy, go over here. Now if I try to paste into the QuickTime VR, you can't. It's grayed out.

But this is how you do it. QuickTime VR works really interesting. You can actually do some important modifications. If you change the controller of a movie to the regular movie controller-- And now, if I move the timeline, nothing changes in the timeline. Check this out. I've got that available now. So I can select all my timeline, which doesn't do anything, and add scale.

which would actually show the ping image throughout the video, or throughout the VR. Now I can go back into the video track seven was the last one added. This is my logo. Let me actually change the name first. Logo. And graphics mode, I can apply the transparency, or the alpha channel, sorry, of the ping document. And now I just made a really beautiful watermark. Now, if I try to play this QuickTime VR, it's not showing as a QuickTime VR because of the controller. So I got to go back and set the controller for the whole movie to be QuickTime VR.

This is the part you go, ooh. Oh, that is so cool. We have one VR that actually has a target. So it appears in the center, and you can actually figure out the center of the screen and take advantage of that alpha channel to actually blend it into the background. And you can also drag from over here, as you can see. It's just applying a really beautiful logo.

OK, if I can go back to the slides, please. Another very simple-- well, not very simple, very simple process, but very powerful process is adding multilingual capabilities to your players and to your movies. And this is something that is more and more important now these days. Particularly, for example, this presentation in the morning where they're talking about Japan and all these really beautiful things that you can do in Japan. And we're getting the translation to Japanese. Thank you very much for everybody over there in the cabin.

So multilingual content is becoming way more important now these days. And what I'm going to do is, I already have two text tracks, one in English and one in Spanish, for this particular VR that I had done. Let me show you how you do it. So if I can go back to the PowerBook, please.

I've got my English and Spanish text documents. I'm going to force open them on the QuickTime player, both of them. I'm going to attach them to the video, or to the QuickTime VR. So it's pretty much the same text in English and in Spanish. And it's just one sample. It's just one single text.

And what I want is I want the text to appear to the right of the movie and stay there all the time. So I'm going to grab the English track, select all, copy, go back to the VR. I cannot do anything over here, so go back in the Genfo window. Change the controller to the movie controller. Add scale. Oops. Select all. Add scale.

So I added a text track. I need to move it around. Text track. And generally I'm going to change the name to English. Yeah, that's English. Change the size and the location. I hope I'm not going too fast. I know I'm going fast. And I'm just going to change the size to, let's say, 220.

[Transcript missing]

This is a drag, doing it with just the drag and drop. But QuickTime is actually going to select the Spanish and the English track. Right now I haven't defined which one is which. Right now, if you go to the alternate section for the particular track, both of them appear to be English. So actually the Spanish is overlapping the English. But you could say the English, it's definitely English, but it should be an alternate for the Spanish track. And on the other hand, the Spanish track should be in Spanish.

And it is an alternate for the English track. So now if you have a machine, Or if you have a NOES that is set to Spanish, the Spanish version will come up. And if you have a machine in English, the English version will come up. I need to change back the controller to QuickTime VR.

And I'm not going to change the settings of my OS, but in the preferences pane, if you drag and drop the languages in there, it will change the language of the OS, which is amazing, especially for testing. But you can also change the language in the QuickTime player. So right now, I have the default language, which is English. And as you can see, the English text track appears on top, even though the Spanish version should be physically on top.

But if you change the language to Spanish, Then the Spanish version gets deployed. So if I was to deploy this movie right now, and somebody had a Spanish OS, they would get that. No questions asked, no flickering, no nothing. If they had an English OS or another OS, they would get the English version. That is cool. Really cool. And I don't know if you noticed, but there's an accent over there. So it sort of handles, and particularly with QuickTime 6.3, it handles text much better.

OK, now that I'm over here, another important thing that you can do in the info window, which I will mostly recommend, is annotations. Has anybody used annotations? A few of you guys. You guys should use annotations. When you use annotations, pretty much what you're doing is you're tagging your movie to be whatever information you want in there. And you can add a ton of things.

And the important thing is that certain databases, and more databases now a day, are supporting this metadata. So the databases can actually retrieve that data, and depending on the searching criteria, display the movies that fit that criteria. So you can see, these are all the things that you can add in there. But there's this particular one, movie name. It's really cool. See the name at the top of the window, which is x.miguel.mov? That's the actual file name. You don't want that all the time. Sometimes you want something different. I don't want the .mov there.

Miguel. So when you actually apply a full name property in the annotations, That is the name of the object that appears over here, and it also changes the name at the top. So you can actually use that somewhat to your branding, and also of course for the searching criteria in your database. So I'm gonna hold that movie over there, and I'm gonna go back to the slides.

Thank you very much. So that was the language thing. That was the annotations where definitely as more and more content becomes digital, you definitely want to annotate it so it could be found much, much, much easier. Now this is the one that I was going to get to. I love this example. The other day I had a student at school where he has a DVD project. He has a still menu, has a transition that goes to another still menu.

And for those of you that have used DVD Studio Pro, it actually has a color shift. It makes a color shift. So if I can go back to the PowerBook, please. Let me show you what I mean. And I'm going to hide the QuickTime player. Here we go. And this is the typical DVD Studio Pro project, where you have a still image.

This is my menu. It has three buttons. It's a still image. It has no video. You see there's no timeline. And when you click on the marmalade button, I should get a transition. This is a video transition in MPEG-2 that goes to the last marmalade menu, which is also still menu.

And this is what it looks like. If you actually open it on the DVD player, Oh, I opened up the wrong application. Sorry about that. Here's a DVD player. If you play this thing on the player, you're going to notice that the first menu has a gamma that tends to be relatively dark. Let me go full screen.

and play. So that's the gamma. And when I click on the mermelade, you're going to notice how the color is going to shift, transition is going to happen, and then it's going to flicker again. It's going to change the color again. So it becomes brighter and then darker. That's not cool. That's definitely not professional. And the reason for that is because the way DVD Studio Pro is actually handling the compression of the steel frames. So you can actually work around it. Let me do it again. Dark, bright, transition, dark.

Really, it's not cool. So the solution is this. The solution is turn that still menu into a video menu. But you don't want motion. You want a still image. Well, QuickTime Pro to the aid. And we did this in five minutes over there at school. I'm going to do it a little bit quicker over here, because I already prepared some of the media. And this is my transition. It comes from Final Cut Pro. I'm going to open it in QuickTime Player. Instead of going to Final Cut Pro, editing a frame, and making it into a video, and exporting the whole thing, blah, blah, blah, blah, nah. QuickTime Player.

This is what I've got. This is my video that gets turned into MPEG-2. Right now it's the DB file. And if you notice, there are six frames before the actual transition happens, or five frames or so. So I'm going to select those. Pressing on the Shift key, you can see at the bottom.

Okay, that's too much. Over here, have five frames, copy, make a new document, paste. So I've got a new video that is just five frames long. You can actually see in the GINFO window. It's five frames long. And I'm just going to paste a few more. 10 frames long. So I'll copy paste. 20.

One second long, select all, copy, paste. Two seconds, select all, copy, paste, four. Six, eight, 10, select all, copy, paste, 20, 30 seconds. I'm just going to make it 30 seconds long for the sake of argument here. So now I've got a 30 second video of a still frame.

If I was to export this document as video, it would actually be one frame stretched through time. But I want to turn that now into MPEG-2, and this is the part where we're going to see the little progress bar. That's why I'm just making it 30 seconds long. And I've got DVD Studio Pro 1.5 installed. I don't have Final Cut Pro 4. But if you had Final Cut Pro 4, it would be the same deal, pretty much. And I'm in the DVD color shift. And I'm gonna save it here as my.

I always don't know how to spell that one. I hope that's the correct spelling. I hear somebody mumbling that's the wrong spelling. Okay. Save. So this is just going to compress the MPEG-2 video. And now that I have the MPEG-2 video compressed with the same compression application than the transition video, there should be no gamma differences between the two videos, which is why it's causing the actual flickering of the video.

And in this case, this is how we solve the problem of that particular student. By the way, this is not the project that particular student was working on. This is just some pictures that I took in the kitchen the other day and decided to use for my project here.

But now when I bring this document into DVD Studio Pro and attach this video instead of the actual still image behind for the menu, DVD Studio Pro will not flicker anything, or the DVD player will not flicker anything. So let me hide the QuickTime player, go back to DVD Studio Pro. I already made the one at the end, the video for the last menu.

And this is how I'm going to do it. I'm going to select the image for the recipe video-- for the recipe menu, sorry. The picture as of right now, it's a picked image. I'm not going to change anything except select the video that I just made. Yeah, that's the wrong spelling.

I'm going to loop it now. Go back to my Marimole video, which is also a picked image, and apply my MPEG-2 video that comes from QuickTime Player. "Where is that Mermanade video? Where is that? And you picked, still menu, here we go. Bad naming. And if I preview this document, oh, forgot to loop. And if I preview this thing, I'm also gonna preview it in the player.

When I go to marmalade, there is no color shift. Oh yeah. For those of you that have used DVD Studio Pro, you should be going, yeah! Because it is terrible. It makes your project not professional. And if you're wondering if it really works, this is what it looks like once it's on the player.

And you're going to notice there is no color shift. So for those of you using DVD Studio Pro and you want to do this, by all means. So I go into the marmalade section. No color shift.

[Transcript missing]

Okay, go back to the, I need to go back to the slides please. Keep on losing the clicker. It's over here.

So in this case, what I have in the slide is to actually, instead of just copying and pasting the slides, is actually to use a text track and add scale to change the duration. I'm going to be really sincere with you. I did that on the airport coming here, and it was not working for me. It was still shifting colors.

I have no idea why. I'm really hoping, I'm looking forward for the expert session to bring that one on. But in this case, I just copied and pasted the frame or the frames. So that was a demo that I just did. Sorry, if I could go back to the slides.

This is an important thing that most of you should already know, but some of you may not know. The difference between save as export and save as self-contained and save as what QuickTime names normally. And this is a very, very important thing. If you bring me, that's why I left my media open on the player. Some of the media that I have in there, I want to save, but without recompression.

For example, the one that has the mask, I want to compress that one. I want to make it into smaller video that would be deployed on the web. Right now it's a .db file. On the other hand, the one that has the Marina stop animation, that one has the Flash player on top, which if I recompress, the Flash player is going to be rendered onto video, and my interactivity is going to be gone. I want to keep the Flash independent from the video. So that's where you use the save or the export. So save as is going to make a movie self-contained.

Actually, Save As, self-contained movie, is actually going to make a movie fast start. So if for any reason you have a movie that for some reason when you deploy it on the web, it does not fast start, it's because something was changed in the movie when it was saved. Sometimes Cleaner 5 and I think Cleaner 6 still has that bug. You make a movie that's supposed to be fast start, and it does not fast start. You have to download the whole thing first and then play it.

You can fix that by opening the movie in the QuickTime Player, Save As, self-contained. It will make it fast start by default. It compresses the movie header and flattens the file, which means that it just makes it a little tiny smaller and puts the header at the front of the document. That's what makes it fast start.

It also copies the media to the new file without recompression. So in this particular case where I have the Marina movie and it's the flash track on top referenced to another external flash document, when I go Save As, self-contained, it's going to copy the flash media into the movie and will break any dependencies from any other files, which is most important, particularly on the web.

So how many people have you seen that? You open up a QuickTime movie. It opens perfectly fine on your computer, even though it's coming from the web. But if you try it on another computer that has exactly the same settings, you open up the movie and it has a whining message from QuickTime saying that the media could not be found if you want to search it. Well, that's because the movie was not saved as self-contained. Thank you.

Now, Save Normal, it allows you to save references on the media, which means does not copy the media. Think of the example where I made the image sequence, and I have 75 documents in there. Right now, that movie that I have open on the QuickTime player, it's actually referencing all 75 documents.

So, if I move that movie somewhere else, I need to move all 75 movies somewhere else. Which is really cool, because if I do it on my machine over here, just by saving with dependencies as normal, I can just make a really tiny document without actually taking my hard drive, or taking a lot of space in my hard drive.

Having said that, most of the times you would not use that for deployment. Another thing is when you just save normal, it breaks fast start. So, if you open up a document, you add a frame, and you just save, that will not make it fast start. You actually have to select File, Save as Self-contained. Otherwise, it will not be fast start.

Export. Export is when you actually compress the media. You go file, export. Well, there's actually one exception to that rule, and it's when you're dealing with QuickTime VR. But for the most part, when you're in video, and you select file, export, you will recompress the media. One typical mistake that newcomers to QuickTime do is they have a Sorenson video movie, for example. They take it in QuickTime Player, then they select file, export, thinking that they're going to make it smaller by recompressing it further.

Yeah, you will be recompressing it, which is not what you want in an already compressed movie. You're actually going to lose more quality than what you already lost. But a cool thing is, for example, in the case of the Marina, I'm going to export the document, and I'm going to change the size. I'm going to apply a filter, and that's the one that I ended up using in the player. So if I could go back to the PowerBook, please.

That's my DVD Studio Pro project. Let me get out of there. Let me get out of DVD Studio Pro. Actually, there's nothing there. That's because everything should be in the QuickTime Player. So I'll show you this one. Don't need to say that. This is an example. I've got my-- actually, this is not a good example right now. Sorry about that.

[Transcript missing]

Okay, give me a second. I've got to prepare the image sequence again, but it takes no time. So I'm going to re-import the image sequence. Import image sequence or open image sequence. Select my image sequence for the marina at 10 frames per second. And the one that I added the Flash Player to, it was a 256 by 192 video. It also had different RGB values. I don't know if you noticed that it had more saturation.

It had better, well, I think the colors, I like the saturated colors. So in this particular case, I do want to compress this thing to a smaller version. Right now, it's a referencing movie that refers to all 75 documents. Check this out. See, it refers to all of these documents. Ba-da-ba-da-ba-da-ba, all 75 of them. So I want to compress this movie. Because I want to compress, I go through the export, not to the save selection. And I'm going to compress to a QuickTime movie.

[Transcript missing]

So I already modified my hue, saturation, and lightness as a filter. And also the size. I don't want this humongous 640 by 480. I actually want a 256 by 192 document. So you click on the Size button, and you can enter whatever size you want. And click OK.

Click OK. And let me save this document as-- Marina Compressed. And I'm just gonna wait for the little bar to go through. It's compressing the movie to MPEG-4. It has no audio. It's just a video. But it's resizing it, applying a filter, and applying the codec.

[Transcript missing]

Now I was supposed to save the QuickTime VR movie that had the little logo, but unfortunately this thing crashed on me big time, and I'm not going to stop for that. So this is what it looks like now. The save as version.

You see the color values are different. File size, of course, is quite different. You can also see in the info window, the file size of the original would be around 65 megs. And the size of this new one, whoops, that's another one. The size of this new one is just 227 kilobytes. So it has been compressed, it has been applied filter, and this is the one which I added the flash track for controlling. So let me actually do that. Let me actually go through that process, which is adding the flash controller.

Length matches, copy, paste, select all, add scale. Go into the GINFO window for the flash track, apply the graphics mode. As you can see, I've been doing this for a while. And it's already done. Get out of here. Now, this document here has pretty much everything. But if I go File, Export, and recompress again, it's going to render the flash to video, and that's not.

That's actually going to lose interactivity. And right now, if you take a look at the file section here, it actually depends on two documents, which is also not good if I deploy this thing on the web. I need to save it as a single document. And at that point, that's where you would use Save As, Self-Contained. By default, it's saved normally. I don't understand why, but Save As Self-Contained.

Marina flash And you're going to notice how the Marina Flash does not depend on anybody else. Because I saved as self-contained, it's also fast start. So if I upload this thing to the web server, it's going to start playing as soon as it has enough media. You don't have to wait for the whole 227 kilobytes to download.

Well, on a 56K motor, my guess is quite a bit of media. Okay, I said that preview was part of QuickTime Pro, and not many people know about that. But let me show you how preview works. Has anybody ever heard or worked with QTIF images? QuickTime Image Format, I think is what it's called. And nobody's raising their hand. Okay, I'm getting into a territory that has not been touched by my audience.

OK, QTIF images. Let me set the perspective for this. How many of you have seen a QuickTime movie that tries to be played by the Windows media player on a Windows machine? And a few of you say, yeah. Oh, yeah. Well, the reason for that is, again, and Frank was talking about it in the morning, like, for God's sake, having the three players in one machine.

Well, some people do that. Actually, most people do that. They have the three players. And depending on which one was the last one you installed or the user installed, that would most of the times take the extensions of other media files and try to play those media files.

So what's happening in that case is that the Windows Media Player is trying to open the .mov document. And, of course, having a Sorenson Video or an MPEG-4, which is not supported by Windows Media, Windows Media just says, no, your movie was not authored properly. That's totally misleading. What's happening, again, is the Windows Media is opening the QuickTime movie.

Apple had made, I don't know since when, I think it was QuickTime 3, that they came up with this thing called QuickTime Image File Format, which is images, whatever images that QuickTime supports, wrapped around a QuickTime container and saved as what's called a QTIF. It's an image file. The good thing about those is that Windows Media, or Rio, or nobody else of today has appropriated that extension. So you can embed this QTIF image.

And then you will definitely know that if QuickTime is installed, QuickTime will use that image, or QuickTime will be used to render that image in the web browser, which is really powerful. And the example is quite simple. I have a picture taken from my QuickTime VR, which is just a pic. I'm opening Photoshop. And no, it's actually in simple text.

Anyway, this is just a pic that I'm going to use in my web page just to be able to-- as a poster movie that you click on it and pops up in my QuickTime VR movie. So this is a PICT. I'm going to open it up in preview. And because I do have QuickTime Pro installed, or licensed, as you would expect, You got an export option.

I'm going to be really sincere with you. That export option is pretty useless in preview, because it exports to the typical file formats that you would know, which most of the times you would actually want to do that in Photoshop or in other applications. But in this particular case, the QTIF image that I want to create, Photoshop does not create QTIF images for some bizarre reason.

But preview does. QuickTime image. So what, what, what, if I click on the options, I can go and change my codec. So my pic, I can turn into a JPEG and wrap it around the QuickTime file format with a .QTIF extension. Which Windows Media or Rio will not dare to open because those guys don't know what QTIF is.

So click OK, click OK. And I'm going to call this thing-- Just that sand.qtif. Save. And if I open that document, It's just a JPEG wrapped around the QuickTime container. Now I can grab that image, embed it around HTML, turn it into a poster movie, and the Julia Childs thing. You put it in the oven, and you just pull it out.

I already wrote my HTML for this. Well, it wasn't actually me, it was Pejot, which is a freeware application that I would recommend you guys use that writes the HTML code for you. Okay, sorry about that. I should have shown you. If I go to the applications in here.

That's what it's called. And I think it's Windows too. It's also OS 9, OS 10, and Windows. It's made by Brick, I think, in France. Freeware. I don't, but if you go to Version Tracker, if you go to just Google and search for Page Oat and QuickTime, it will find that thing. It's beautiful. Let me actually show you how it works. And in this case, I'm actually going to... Yeah, I have a few minutes for this.

If you just drag and force open it in page on, what it does, it grabs the size, height and width. If it was a QuickTime movie, you could specify if you want controller or autoplay. In this case, I don't because it's just an image. And actually, I want to make it into a poster image where you click on it.

It opens up the QuickTime VR in the QuickTime player. I think that's in the advanced section where I can specify an href. And what I want to open up in the href is my QuickTime VR movie. Copy. Paste. Oops. Oops. Oh, oh, oh, wrong place, wrong place. What did I do wrong? Okay, I'm changing the name over here. That's bad.

Sorry about that. The href is my QuickTime movie, and I want to open it in the QuickTime player. So what I'm doing is I'm making a poster movie that will appear on the web browser. You click on that poster movie, and up comes in the QuickTime player, the QuickTime VR with the text and my little logo at the top.

So I'm entering the URL, QuickTime player. And if you take a look over here, it says show code. You don't have to make a typo for that class ID anymore. Copy? Go into BBEdit or into your favorite HTML editor, which mine happens to be BBEdit. And paste the code.

The change in size over here so you guys can read from the back. And as you can see, it has the name of the source, the href, everything. This program is worth its download 15 million times in dollars. And so when you take a look at the final version, This is what the final version looks like on Safari, which I just haven't had the chance to upgrade to the final version, to the 1.0. But you're going to see I've got my QTIF displayed by the QuickTime plugin. And if I click on that, maybe I should have my QuickTime VR popping up in the QuickTime player.

So that's what a QTIF image does, and that's what Preview does. I mean, not many people know all of that, but Preview is part of QuickTime Pro. And the last thing that I wanna talk about today, I'm actually really happy with the timing. I thought that I didn't have enough time. But this is it. I have a single node QuickTime VR.

It's just one node. And let's say that for some reason it's not fast starting. Your user has to download the whole QuickTime VR. For some reason, something got broken in the process. Now you need to make it fast start. Well, you would say file, save as. But in this particular case, this is the only, or QuickTime VR is the only exception where if you go to export.

For the single VR, there's an option over here that says, movie to fast start QuickTime VR movie, which will actually flatten the QuickTime VR. And if you want, you can actually add-- You can add a preview image. So you could have a preview image that is either, people, what most people do is they have a low res version of the QuickTime VR.

But you can have something else, maybe like your logo or like some other image. Doesn't have to be necessarily the same one. And you can import it over here. In this case, I'm not gonna import, I'm just gonna use the default, which is just grabbing a smaller version at Blur. And this thing will, actually make it fast start. I'm removing the spaces for web compatibility, fast.

And off it goes. In this particular case, the export will not recompress the media. It will just recompress for the preview, but not the actual VR. So it's not going to lose any further quality. Now the reason why I have two QuickTime VRs in this particular folder is because this is another typical example. Most, well not most people, but a lot of people, they make QuickTime VRs, mostly for CD-ROM, let's say, in a multi-node environment.

So this particular movie, it's a multi-node movie, which this is node number one. If you go down there, that's node number two. And if you go over here into the kitchen and out the door, you get node number three. So this, there are three nodes in here, making the movie relatively large.

If you take a look at the G-Info window again, we can find out what size this thing is. And it's 570K, so let's say that 560K is too large for your audience, and you don't want, maybe they will never click on the second node, and you wasted all that bandwidth.

Well, how many of you guys knew that you can grab a multi-node QuickTime VR in the QuickTime player, go again into the export window, and because it's a QuickTime VR, a multi-node QuickTime VR, the options change in here. I cannot make the single node as it appeared before, but there's this other one down below, and I see some people stretching their heads to see at the bottom of the screen.

It says separate single node movies. What this thing's going to do is going to separate the three nodes into independent movies. Now this is really cool, because you can also generate some HTML. Now unfortunately, I think that HTML is relatively outdated, meaning I don't think it does add the object tag. But at least it gets you going. So you can control what appears on the HTML tag. And it says target equals myself. So it will actually generate the HTML where it will keep the number of the nodes and the linking of the nodes so it targets itself.

And the same thing, you can go into the flattener, and if you want, you can apply a preview, your own preview or whatever. Click OK. Multinode. Export. Save. And take a look at what QuickTime did for us. It made three movies, which if I open them individually, these are my three nodes. One node over here-- whoops.

Anybody working with QuickTime VR around here? Yes, another node, and another node. And it also made the HTML, well again, it's not the full HTML, it's just the embed tag over here, where you would need to actually add the object tag. But if I just do something like this, if I make a new HTML document, new HTML document. Untitled, whatever. And copy and paste one of these guys in there. Paste. In this particular case, because it's Safari, I don't need the object tag. Save as. Let me save it in the same location as my other VRs. QuickTime VR export.

[Transcript missing]

It links to the three VRs. Because it already wrote the code with the ID numbers of the different nodes. So if somebody never clicks on this particular node, well, they never get to download that particular movie. So that's a save on bandwidth. And the very last thing that I want to talk about really briefly is Something called QuickTime Media Links. Has anybody ever heard of QuickTime Media Links?

Okay, you guys need to take the advanced courses. This, this thing, this, this QuickTime Media Links are, if you take a look at the QuickTime 6 documentation in the geeky side of the, of the Apple site, in the developer site, it talks about what it's called a pre-flight movie.

Or a pre-flight, which can test if your movie or if your player complies with certain playback parameters. And if it does, it, something happens. In this particular case, in this particular example, let me, let me go back to, to, hey, where did my stuff go? Desktop demo files for the QTIF. Let's say that I want this QuickTime VR movie that I've shown a number of times. Let's say that we wanted to go full screen.

But I want to make it go full screen without actually going into Live Stage Pro or into anywhere else because I've got this thing already done. Well, you can make what is called a QT, a QuickTime media link document, which ultimately is just a text document. It's an XML text document that will force or that will indicate the QuickTime player to take certain actions. And the QuickTime player will help you create that text document. If you go File, Export, you see down here at the bottom it says, whoops, that's not the one. Here. Move it to QuickTime Media Link. Move it to QuickTime Media Link.

And this is the one that will actually make that document call a preflight. See the extension changes. I should actually save it here. And now I click on the options. Now, the URL, this is the URL that is going to happen when this document gets played or open.

And what I want is I want that URL, which is the QuickTime VR movie, to go-- auto-playing controller-- to go full screen on the QuickTime player. So I've got this thing checked for full screen. Now, this will not modify the QuickTime VR movie. This is actually going to tell the QuickTime player that the movie in that URL should go full screen without even modifying or touching the actual QuickTime VR movie. So I click OK. Let me save that as the-- how do I want to call this thing? Media link.

[Transcript missing]

If I take a look at the finder, it makes something that appears with a QuickTime movie icon. It is a QTL, which actually, if you open it in BBEdit, it's a text document. Now if you embed this document, what I've done in this case, I made a similar version of what I had before, where the one I'm embedding is the QTIO.

See that embed? It's the QTIF, sorry. Hold on, what am I doing? Well, this is quite advanced. It's the QTIF. linking to the QTIL, which actually triggers the QuickTime VR. Did that make any sense? Okay, it did make sense. So if we take a look at, on the browser, If we open this movie on the browser, let me actually quit the player altogether.

If I open that in the browser. I have my QuickTime image. And when I click, it will trigger the QuickTime media link that will, in effect, link to the QuickTime VR full screen. All without changing the actual QuickTime VR. So the player starts to bounce. Off goes full screen.

And that's it. So that concludes my presentation. I'm just going to flip over here to the roadmap. And if you guys want to flip over to the podium. Amy. This shows you really quickly the other sessions that we have going on in this room and the room right on the other side of this wall. This is for the rest of the day, so you can map out where you want to go.

I don't know if you want to take some questions. We don't have much time, though. Yeah, we actually are out of time. So what I'd recommend that you guys do is, you know what Francesco looks like now. I'd recommend that you find him throughout the conference. He'll be here for, are you here all week, Francesco?

Oh, absolutely. Yes, all right. So thank you very much. And actually, let me just show you, we have contact info here. Francesco and Guillermo Ortiz, our Apple developer connection contact for you guys. All right. There's a bunch of information there, different URLs, different books, where you can get some information and use the QuickTime player. You can also use the help section in the QuickTime player. Just go file or help, and not many people know that.
