---
Title:  Mixed Platform Messaging Solutions
Year:   2006
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2006/508/

[!] This transcript was generated using Whisper, it has known transcription errors.
---

Well, good afternoon. My name is JD Mankovsky, and I manage Apple's Enterprise Professional Services team for the U.S., and we actually do quite a bit of large enterprise deployments around server storage, email, backup, XAN deployments. And today I'm here to talk about enterprise messaging solutions. And for those of you who might have been to WWDC before, we've done this for the past few years.

So I'm here to give you another update as to where we are compared to probably about 12 months ago. So here's our website as well if you want more information on what we do, apple.com slash services. So we're going to first give you an update on the client side.

And talk about some updates from Microsoft, IBM, Novell. And then we'll talk about some OS X server solutions. So for those of you who are interested in deploying both collaboration solutions on our platform, both on the server and on the client side, we'll talk about those. Mixed in some success stories with those solutions. And then we'll just finish up the session and open it up for Q&A. There'll be Q&A with myself, and then there's some people from the Microsoft team who are available. available that you can talk to after the session.

So first let me give you a quick update on Groupware Enterprise client solutions for the Mac. And obviously, how many people in the room here use Microsoft Entourage or Exchange? Yeah, quite a bit of you. Yeah, yeah. How many people here use IBM Lotus Notes? Okay. And Novell?

Okay, that makes a lot of sense. So, um, well... It makes a lot of sense. I mean, it's kind of what we see on the services side. There's definitely a lot of people that use Exchange out there. So what I'd like to do is kind of focus on kind of some of the, an update from Microsoft, and first talk about the Mac OS X client for the Mac, which is mainly Entourage 2004.

That's what the majority of the clients use nowadays on the Mac, and Microsoft has done some pretty significant improvements to Entourage over the past few revisions, and we'll talk about that. For those of you who really want the full Outlook experience, and who feel like Entourage is not sufficient for your requirements, well, obviously the Microsoft team would love to hear, you know, what other features do you need on the Mac.

But if you're... If you do want the full Outlook, you can use RDC, which is the Microsoft, you know, remote desktop client. Outlook Web Access, so they obviously have Web Access. And then, obviously, some of you might be running Parallel already on your new MacBooks or MacBook Pros or Mac Pro machines. But Parallel is a great, great solution to run any Windows application on the Mac. And then, obviously, some of you might have seen the announcement from VMware, which they are also porting over. So, you could potentially run that through a VMware container.

Obviously, Outlook Web Access is important, especially when a lot of us travel and need to quickly connect and check email. You can go to a cyber cafe or wherever and just get to your email very quickly. And the Microsoft team has been pretty hard at work to make sure that they have very nice support for Safari. And with the next version of Exchange Server, version 2007, they have significantly improved the richness of the content being displayed through the Safari web browser using Outlook Web Access.

Here's a screenshot of what RDC would look like. And I'm sure a lot of you use RDC. Even a lot of Mac IT people who want to administrate Windows 2000, Windows 2003 servers. And Microsoft actually announced today that they're in the process of, they will be releasing in the future a universal binary version of the RDC client on our platform. this year.

Entourage 2004. So when we talked about Entourage last year, this is kind of where we were, right? There was synchronization of emails, there was, you know, scheduling available, there's global address list directory, form-based authentication support, delegate support, which was, you know, not quite what we wanted. And then, obviously, you know, it's a Mac, it's the native Mac OS X product.

And here's a, you know, a nice screenshot of what, you know, Entourage 2004 looks like. I'm sure a lot of you are familiar with that UI, but, you know, in this case, you can see you've got free busy, you can invite quite a few people to a meeting, and it does what it needs to do, right? To go to a Senate meeting to a bunch of people at the same time.

Last year when we talked, the Service Pack 2 release was not available at last developer conference. And Microsoft said, this is what we're working on. And the good news is they released Service Pack 2 in early 2006. And from what we heard, it significantly helped the integration of the Mac platform within an exchange environment.

And so the Mac BU has been really hard at work to make sure that the needs of the Mac client integrating with an exchange environment are well served. And they did a pretty good job with this Service Pack 2 release. And we'll go into some of the key details behind SP2 in just a second.

So obviously, you know, global address lists, you go to look up addresses are very important. That was significantly improved. The fact that you can tie in multiple calendars and look up multiple users' calendars and address book views within the product, that was a pretty big significant request from the users. Obviously, delegation was big. Full support for delegation was crucial.

Obviously, you know, when you have an admin and she needs to update your calendar, those are all, you know, really key features. Sharing was greatly improved and then public support, you know, there was some feedback that the public folders, some were showing up, some were not. It was kind of slow. Things got a lot, you know, significantly better in the SP2 release.

Obviously, client-server synchronization was something else. As the mailboxes were getting significantly big, there was also some slowdowns there. They did a really good job on that side. And sync services as well. So being able to integrate with iSync and syncing your address book and your iCal with Entourage are pretty neat features, especially when you need to then sync with a PDA or a Trio or something. It makes it pretty easy. Pretty neat.

On the server side, things are pretty straightforward. I mean, what do you need to support entourage on the Mac? Well, pretty much Exchange 2000, 2003, with Service Pack 2 or later. If you want to take advantage of some of the newer features, the new OWA features, we encourage, or Microsoft encourages you as well, to test the 2007 server, Beta 2, which is available. And then obviously, Outlook Web Access needs to be enabled, which is pretty straightforward. WebDAV and LDAP need to be turned on as well on the server side.

So that's kind of a quick update on the entourage side. As far as some of the collaboration tools that are out there, how many people here use Microsoft Messenger?

[Transcript missing]

Server-side requirements for Messenger, again, the live communication server, Service Pack 1, or the Microsoft Office communication server, which is in beta. That's the next version, version 2007, as well as support for the live communication server 2005 for the public IMing connectivity. So if you want to be able to do IMs across the Internet to other types of chat services.

Let me quickly talk about SharePoint. So how many people here use or have SharePoint deployed within their company? Okay, so quite a few of you. So the good news is Microsoft has also been working pretty hard to support Safari. And in the SharePoint version 3, they're definitely adding some significant support. Microsoft is now using the ASP.NET version 2, which has the Safari and Firefox support in there.

And in this case, we're showing their project document management screenshot here. And pretty much, you know, everything you can do on the PC side, you'll be able to do on the Mac through the Safari browser in terms of, you know, document and project management here. So that's really exciting. Here's a view of the project task view in SharePoint version 3.

Now obviously they're also going to support, you know, Wiki and Blog. That's part of the SharePoint product, their collaboration product, and that's also supported through the Safari browser. Here's another screenshot of the SharePoint version 3 running in Safari. You can see that the rendering, I mean, everything looks pretty nice within Safari, which is really good news for the enterprise world.

This is something that's important to mention. How many people here are Mac IT people? Wow. Yeah. Okay. So, I don't know if-- how many of you have seen this document or have downloaded this document before? Okay, a few of you. So, this is-- this is a significant document.

The BU team has spent a lot of time putting it together, and it's something that you should-- you should all download, which really clearly explains how to integrate Macs, you know, and-- and our servers and-- and Apple-- how to use Apple Remote Desktop, how to use, uh, PackageMaker, how to use a lot of the Apple tools within your Microsoft, you know, your Mac, Microsoft IT environment, and integrate it well within your overall enterprise, um, you know, deployment.

And when you're looking for ammunition as to why do you need an XServe, for example, for the-- the Mac people, um, when you have, you know, a large group of Mac users doing publishing work or working on a lot of, you know, office documents, and your-- your CIO is asking you, "Well, why can't we run this off a, you know, Windows server?" Um, there's some really good information in there that explains, well, you know, if you deploy an XServe and you deploy AFP, Microsoft actually supports launching documents over the network using an XServe.

So that-- all-- all that information is contained in the document, so I-- I strongly recommend that you look at it, 'cause it has a lot of really good info as far as, you know, deploying-- uh, deploying Office and integ-- integrating the-- the-- the Macs, you know, the-- the-- the Macs into this enterprise, you know, Microsoft environment. That a lot of us run into when we deal with large enterprises. So check it out. It has a lot of good content in it.

Obviously, you hear that at Macworld when ROS comes on stage last January and their commitment to shipping a universal binary version of Office. The good news is now the entire code has been ported over to Xcode. So this is huge. The team is really hard at work at getting Office, the next version of Office out, and running it on Intel natively.

And obviously, Microsoft, again, is very committed to the Macintosh platform, and they publicly indicated that with a five-year commitment to develop Office on both PowerPC and Intel. So again, and we probably have eight Microsoft people in the room today that are available, again, to answer your questions after the session. So there's a lot of Microsoft developers at this conference this week, so we're very excited.

And then obviously in terms of resources, I just wanted to highlight those again. There's a lot of resources available from Microsoft to support the Mac community. And if you go to Microsoft.com/exchange or /mac, you'll get to all those other resources that are up there on the slide right now.

So that's the Microsoft update. And what I wanted to do now is quickly talk about IBM. And obviously, there was a few people in the room who use IBM solutions. And the first one I wanted to highlight is IBM WebSphere Portal version 6. And that product was made available on July 26. And that actually has full support for the Safari, for Safari 2.0 and above for the Safari browser. So that's really good news.

As far as, you know, workplace solutions from IBM, obviously, IBM Workplace Content Management, version 6, supports Sapphire 2.0. On the collaboration products, the IBM team is hard at work to release the next version of their collaboration product suite, which will be, you know, the workplace team collaboration, the documents, the workplace documents, as well as the collaborative learning suite, which will be fully supported on the Mac and on Intel in the near future.

Lotus Notes and Domino. So right now, the version that's currently available is version 6.5.5, and that obviously runs natively on PowerPC and runs under Rosetta on the Intel Macs, and that is fully qualified under Rosetta, so there's no issues there. The next version of Notes Domino, which is 7.0.2, which will be the first universal binary release on the IBM side. And that also has some nice same-time messaging. How many people here use same-time? Okay, so that's significant. So integration of same-time messaging within the next release, the 7.0.2 product. And then obviously the Web Access 7.0.2, support using Firefox on Mac. Mac OS X.

Here's a screenshot of the Lotus SameTime 7.5 product, which is coming soon. And that not only has chat, but also has voice over IP built in. It has embedded screenshots. You can do that. That is supported within a chat, as well as history. You go to save all your chats. Creating some custom plug-ins using the Eclipse development suite. And we actually have, I believe tomorrow, we have a session around Eclipse on the Mac platform. So it's something that you might want to go to. As well as dynamic allocation awareness built into the 7.5 product.

So now let's talk about, quickly about Novell. And Novell, group-wise, is their collaboration server solution. And they released version 7 in the June timeframe this year. And they have Mac Intel, so they have a native Mac Intel client, which was released in June. They have iCal support. And for those of you who went to the calendaring session this morning, Novell actually does already support the CalDAV standard, which is what Apple is adopting on the client side and on the server side. So they have CalDAV support within group-wise 7. As well as support for our IPv6, shared contacts with Outlook Connector. So they have an Outlook Connector shipping within group-wise, as well as many bug fixes.

They also announced their GroupWise Mobile Server. Obviously, a lot of us carry Trios, clear BlackBerry, you know, carry Symbian OS-based phones. And so they actually have a pretty interesting product there in terms of, you know, wirelessly syncing all your data via pretty much any carrier, or even using, you know, 802.11, you know, Wi-Fi type devices. Here's an example of the list of products they actually support within the GroupWise Mobility product. You can see it's a pretty large gamut of support in terms of mobile devices within the Novell product.

For any additional information on Novell, please go to novell.com/groupwise or gwmac.com is another really great website to get more information on that. So that's kind of a quick update on the top three, I would say, collaboration client solutions that a lot of education and enterprise companies run on the Mac platform. What I wanted to do now is talk about server solutions. And obviously today, our goal is to talk about third-party solutions.

There's a lot of sessions around Apple's Mail Server and Leopard Server and our new iCal server. And we're not going to spend any time in this session about this. There's three or four sessions at WWDC around that. But what I want to do is spend some time on some of the third-party products that we've seen have been adopted by the Macintosh community and have been deployed on XServes and on Mac OS X Server. And the two products that we've seen have been deployed greatly are Cario. How many people here use Cario in the room? Okay. And then Zimbra. How many people here use Zimbra or have tested Zimbra? Yep. So we're going to talk about Cario first.

[Transcript missing]

So it's a real complete collaboration service solution. It's a mail server, it's a calendar server, it has a lot of really cool features, tasks, notes, folders, public folders are all in there. Obviously, it fully supports POP and IMAP, which is pretty much standard for any mail server out there. It has also full anti-spam, virus checking is all built in. It has some really nice web mail support. It's multi-platform, obviously, and they have some really nice connectivity for the Entourage client and the Outlook client on the PC side.

So Entourage support is pretty much native, so if your users use Entourage on the Mac side, they can just keep using that and you can pretty much migrate the server back in from an Exchange server over to Cario server. They have a really nice tool that allows you to. migrate that, but not touch any of the clients' PCs or Macs.

Just have them keep running Outlook on the PC and keep using Entourage on the Mac. They have backup tools, which are built in, which is very neat, so you don't have to deploy any third party backup for this. And they've had some really good awards in the past 12 months from different magazines.

What I also like about Cario is they fully integrate within our open directory and active directory. So again, if you've already deployed active directory, you don't have to worry about anything. You just tie Cario right in. They have a bunch of attributes. You have to extend the schema. They have all that available on their website. It's pretty much double click and install. And same thing on the open directory side.

The Admin Console is something you can run on Mac OS X, on Linux, or on Windows. It's pretty straightforward. Here's a screenshot of their administration tools. Again, I think they're very easy to use and manage, which makes your life as an IT mail administrator a lot easier. And again, something you can run remotely from pretty much anywhere on pretty much any platform.

[Transcript missing]

They just released version 6.2, which is a universal binary release, so we're really happy about that. This is actually perfect timing with our new server. And they've added a couple things in terms of their web UI, especially when you have a lot of users hitting Cario. They added AJAX support, so the UI is a lot faster. They have SpamAssassin, McAfee, also engines. They have ClamAV if you want to do for email scanning. You can do ClamAV if you want, which is open source and free, as well as sticky note support.

Quickly, I wanted to talk about one of the success stories they've had. This is a hosting company called Socketworks, and they're based in Sun Valley, Idaho. And they do web, email, database design, hosting, and they're running Cario. They've got about 800 email users running on Cario, and previously that company was using 4D mail. And some of the top features that they really liked about Cario, which I think is important, is the web mail mini support.

If you don't know what that is, obviously I'm sure none of you here are running OS 9 anymore. But if you are, you can actually get to your email. But any other mobile device, which as you know, mobile devices have kind of lightweight web browsers. Those allow you to connect and to get to your email through the web interface using their using their kind of light version of this.

Obviously, they have web-based domain administration built in, and again, it's a very cost-effective product. If you go to their website for about 20 users, you're talking about $700 for the software for about 20 users, so it's pretty For more information, you can contact Cario. Just go to info@cario.com or go to www.cario.com. and I think there is someone from Cario. Yep, John. Yep, so John is here from Cario as well if you want to talk to him later after the session.

Another product that I'm very excited to talk about is Zimbra. So this is a company that we've been working with on the professional services side for probably about 18 months. So it was a hush-hush company. They were showing us the product. We were very excited. And then obviously last March, I believe, they released their first Mac OS X Server product.

They have kind of two versions of their product. They have an open source version, which you can download. You can download the Zimbra Collaboration Suite Server on Mac OS X. It's free. And then if you want, obviously, support and clustering and a bunch of other sync services support, then you have to basically pay something of the order of $28 per user per year.

But they have an open source version, which is great because you can download it, test it, and see if it works. And if you want kind of the advanced features, you can buy the product. It's a very innovative solution. It's a very scalable mail solution. The team, the Zimbra team, comes from backgrounds like phone.com, and a lot of people come from Sun. So they're familiar with building very large, scalable enterprise mail solutions.

And they're... They have support like, you know, obviously, XServe support, XSAN support for distributed mail and, you know, large-scale mail deployments, which we'll talk about in just a bit. They've also, obviously, we gave them a lot of feedback in terms of, you know, sync services support. They obviously support mail, but they also sync with iCal and AddressBook as well. Some customers they have right now, again, it's a new product.

Like I said, they just released the OS X version a few months ago. But HNR... HNR Block is a company that has deployed Zimbra. TBW Chai Day also is currently testing the Zimbra suite on our platform, on the Mac OS X server platform, and looking at deploying that, you know, company-wide.

and Dave uses that internally as well. And what's really interesting, they gave me that info yesterday, is they're seeing over a thousand downloads of the Mac OS X Server product per month, which is right behind their VMware container, which runs on pretty much any other platform that VMware might support. So they're very excited about the support and the feedback they're getting from the Apple community. And we're beating, you know, Linux and some of the other versions they might have up there. We're the number two download per month on their platform.

As far as a quick product overview on the Zimbra side, now again, when I was talking to Andy at Zimbra, they gave me like 20 bullets to talk about. And obviously, 20 bullets don't fit in a single slide. So I had to kind of trim it down and go to like the top five or six features built into Zimbra.

But I strongly recommend you just go to their website. They have a beautiful kind of flash demo. You can even download a demo account and test it and kind of check out their interface. Slides are great, but checking out the demo is well worth it. They've got a very rich AJAX client.

It's probably the first AJAX mail solution that I saw, which is truly amazing in terms of the richness of what it can offer. Almost as good as a native client mail solution. They've got calendaring built in. They've got free busy built in. They've got mobile. So they support Blackberry through Notify. And then they have smartphone support built in. So you don't have to buy any additional package that's just built into the product. They have Zimlets. So here's a great example of that.

So they've got integration within Salesforce and Oracle. So let's say you have an email that has like a PO number. You can generate a Zimlet. And as people click in the email, and the PO, it literally can launch, and bring up the PO. So they've got some pretty neat integration within Salesforce and Oracle and pretty much anything else. They can customize that to tie into SAP or any other backend system.

They also have a new document editor, which is built in. So think of it as, again, kind of a blog document type system built into the-- it's called Zimbra Documents. And I believe that's in beta right now, right? And that'll be shipping in the next few weeks. And again, it's like a wiki blog type thing built into the product. and, you know, allows you to embed images, spreadsheets, do a whole bunch of really fun stuff, thanks to the richness of Ajax.

On the admin side, again, there was like 20 features I had to go through, so I trimmed that down to about five. But there's a lot of really cool things on the admin side. They have online backup. They've got single mailbox restores, obviously. They've got HSM support, which is pretty neat.

Obviously, if you're an enterprise, probably you'll run your tier one email on some potential pretty expensive storage. And then as those emails get older, you want to move them to XServe raids, for example. And so the product has that built in. And obviously, anti-spam, anti-virus, as well as the admin runs on a Mac Mini, for example. So what a perfect use for that.

Here's one of their case studies on the education side. So Eastern Illinois University has deployed Zimbra. And this is going to support about 30,000 users. So we can see the scalability of the product. Again, we'll show a good diagram in just a minute, but it's all running on XSERVs, as well as the back end is using our XAN shared storage.

And here's a diagram of what it looks like, where you have the MTA servers, you've got your directory or LDAP servers, and then you have, using IP failover, you've got a set of pairs of mailbox servers, and all that is, all those servers are tied in over a fiber channel to the XAN back end.

So obviously your mail storage is on a central shared storage system, which is using XAN, and then all the mail servers, as you need more mailbox servers, you can just add them up, and all those mail servers talk to the XAN. And each server has its own IP failover set up. So pretty straightforward, pretty much how you would deploy kind of an enterprise class mail server solution. And again, that's something that my team does. So if you have any questions, let us know.

Pricing and Information. So again, the subscription is, like I said, about $28 per year per user. Obviously, they have significant discounts for governmenteducation.org, you know, organization. So, you know, just let them know, give them a call. Sales or email sales at Zimbra.com. And Andy is from Zimbra. He's actually here. He's got his nice black Zimbra and red Zimbra shirts if you want to talk to him afterwards. You can come up. Thank you.

So there's a lot of things we haven't talked about. I just wanted to make sure that we focused on a couple of really key solutions here on the client side and on the server side. But obviously, people might use Communigate. That's also available. I think Communigate runs on probably 40 different platforms. So we don't want to-- Mac OS X is one of the platforms they support. Cario, Novell, some of you might be running Evolution as well, which Novell has an Evolution client available for the Mac.

And that's available as well. Some people might be using Snurdware to integrate with their exchange back end. That's also a great solution available on the Mac platform. So I just wanted to make sure that we talked about these people and made you aware that some of those solutions are available on our platform.
