---
Title:  Introducing iAd Workbench, The Best Way to Market Your App
Year:   2013
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2013/604/

[!] This transcript has potential transcription errors.
---

Good afternoon. My name is Madhu Vudali, and I'm here to introduce iAd Workbench, a new advertising product for iOS developers. We know that many of you at the conference are either new to advertising or never even thought of advertising your apps. So we'll briefly cover why you should advertise your iOS apps and why you should consider iAd for your advertising. We'll go over iAd Workbench and my colleagues, Vineet Gossain and Mike Amirault, will do a couple of demos for you. So let's jump in.

Say you have this beautiful app that you had developed, your awesome app, and it's in the App Store and users might find it. If they know your app, they might actually search for it or if your app is featured in any of the App Store's features like, New & Noteworthy or Editors' Choice, they might chance upon it. Perhaps your app is in many of the app collections that the App Store has.

But consider the fact that there are over 900,000 apps in the App Store. And as Tim Cook pointed out yesterday, hundred thousand of those got added just in the last year. So there's a limited opportunity for your apps to be found in the App Store, but you want to grow your user base. You obviously built good times building your app and it's in the App Store you want users for your App Store. What do you do? What should you do?

You should advertise. With discovery in the App Store, users find your app. Pretty straightforward but you're competing with lots of apps in the App Store. But in advertising, you find your users. You find the users that are likely to download your app. With advertising, you're in control. Obviously discovery and advertising go hand and hand. But again, with advertising, you are in control in finding the users for your app. Finding the users for whom you built the app.

There are many options for advertising, obviously. But we're-- you're an iOS developer and your best option is iAd. We can find users who are likely to download apps like yours because we know who those users are. We run the App Store. We get the data from the App Store and iTunes. So we can find users for you.

Over the last three years, iAd has been working with hundreds of developers promoting thousands of apps and driving hundreds of millions of visits to the App Store. That's the scale and power of iAd that we're offering you. We are offering this new platform for all iOS developers. We're calling it iAd Workbench. A do-it-yourself campaign creation and management application with all the key features you need for your apps. So let me touch on a couple of them. Auction Marketplace.

With Auction Marketplace you have CPC and CPA. So that's cost-per-click of your ad or cost-per-acquisition of a user. So you can bid your CPC and we will not charge you more than that, or if you know roughly what you would pay for acquiring a user, you can input that and we will optimize to achieve that goal.

And with audience targeting, we have two options for you, Auto and Manual. So we've been operating for the last three years and we bring you the power of those learnings with auto targeting where we find, or iAd Workbench finds that right users for your apps. But we also provide many rich targeting options and you can use them, you can find them through the manual targeting that we have.

Third thing I want touch on is ad banners. You need creatives for your ads. If you're working with the creative agency or you have in-house expertise to develop Ad Creative, you can upload them. Or you can use many of the Apple designed beautiful templates for your ads. So, all the key features for your app promotions are all here. We launched this app yesterday, this iAdWorkbench.apple.com and already thousands of iOS developers have already started using. Before we go into the details of iAd Workbench, I want Vineet Gossain to give you a quick demo of the app. Vineet?

Great. Thanks Madhu. Now, as Madhu mentioned, I know a lot of you guys are brand new to advertising, so I want to show you guys how quickly and easily you can create a new ad campaign using the iAd Workbench. It only takes a few minutes. For those of you who are more experienced in advertising, I'll be back later to give the demo of some of the more powerful features that are offered by iAd Workbench. Let's start with a quick demo of creating a campaign. So this is your Dashboard when you first log in to iAd Workbench. We'll click on Create Campaign.

And the very first thing you need to do is you need to choose which app you want to promote. All of your Apps are here. Let's choose Klara our productivity app. You give it a campaign name, Klara Summer Promotion, and hit Next. Oops, already exists. OK, Campaign Summer Promotion 2. That one does also exist.

OK, sorry. Couple of test runs [laughter]. OK, so the next thing you need to do is you need to find your audience. As Madhu mentioned, we have two options, the Auto option, or the Manual option. If you choose Manual, you get several different targeting categories such as device, gender, age, if you know exactly which user you want to target. But for most of you, your best bet is Auto. For Auto, iAd will automatically figure out who are the best users to show your ad to at the right time to maximize downloads.

For this campaign, we'll choose Auto as well. The next option is your Flight Dates. Basically, when your want your campaign to run, you can time your campaign to run with the specific promotion or specific holiday, or you can just have it start today. For this demo, let's just have it start today. The final piece is entering your campaign budget. For the budget, that's basically how much you want to spend on this campaign over the life of the campaign.

For this demo, we use 2,500 dollars. But you can go as low as 50. You can choose the Daily Spend Goal, if you want to limit how much you're spending on a daily basis but that field is optional. We'll stick with the pre-calculation which evenly spends the budget across the duration of the campaign.

And then the final option is how you want to pay for your ads. You have two options as Madhu mentioned, CPA or cost-per-acquisition, basically how much you're willing to pay for each additional download of your app. Your other option, CPC, or cost-per-click is basically you're giving us the maximum you're willing to pay for each click on one of your ads.

Let's stick with CPA and we'll put in 2 dollars and 50 cents as a CPA goal. You can hit this Calculate button and what we'll do is we'll do an estimate and give an estimate of how many expected impressions or number of times your ad will appear in front of users. The expected number of taps, how many taps you can expect people to actually have clicked on your ad and roughly about how many downloads you can expect to result from this campaign.

You can go in and tweak these numbers if you-- you can go in and tweak the budget numbers or the CPA goal if you feel you want to get more downloads. But let's just stick for this for now. We hit Next, and then the next piece is you have to choose the artwork that you wish to show to the end users as part of your campaign.

We have two options. You can upload your own where all you need to do is you need to provide the various artwork for the devices that you wish to target, or you have the option of using one of our Apple design templates. Now, each of our templates, we have five different templates each with multiple color schemes and each of them is animated. For this campaign, let's use a JetSet. For each template, you provide three things, the title, Klara; the message, "Getting things done, faster" and a call to action. We'll do download now.

You can replay the animation, so you can see what it will look like to the end users and you enter in everything just once and we'll automatically create the templates for each of the devices that you wish to target. So, in this case we created both iPhone and iPad banners. If we're happy with that we give it a banner name, Klara JetSet, and hit Next.

And now, the final piece is the Banner Summary. On the Banner Summary, you can choose to create additional banners if you so desire in case you want to compare how one banner does against another. But for this demo, we'll stick with just a single banner. Now, the final step is the Campaign Summary.

Within the Campaign Summary, this is your final review, make sure everything is OK. Confirm your budget, 2,500 dollars, our CPA goal of 2 dollars and 50 cents, our Klara banner, we hit Submit and you're done. Since it's-- there you go. So, your campaign is created and quick and easy, and you're ready to go. Back to you Madhu.

[ Applause ]

That was awesome. Thank you Vineet. I was certainly timing him and it was about five minutes and that's the fastest he's done. So that's a new record Vineet. So, let's go into an overview of iAd Workbench. So, we want to cover three topics: one, how you can get started; two, how you can create campaigns; and three, how you can manage the performance of the campaigns that you have created. Getting started. Getting started is very easy. You log in, you sign up and setup your payment.

Log-in with your developer credentials. Sign up to the terms and conditions of iAd Workbench with a new service from Apple and you just have a different terms and conditions, and you setup your payment. We accept major credit cards or you can also apply for a line of credit. You're done with your sign up.

Next, you create Campaigns. Vineet went through a fairly quick campaign creation process. Let's go a little deeper in each of these steps. Selecting an app. So every campaign is anchored around an app because that's what's your promoting. So, when you sign up as a developer, all your apps are already here. So, you pick the app you want to promote, and you give your campaign a name and you hit Next. So, your campaign is essentially the first step of your campaign creation is done.

Next step is selecting an audience. In the demo that we saw, we have two options, Auto and Manual. With Auto, you get the optimized audience selection from iAd Workbench. What do we mean by that? It means that iAd Workbench finds the right user at the right time, on the right device in the right app to maximize the downloads for you.

Recall that I mentioned that we've been operating for over three years, you're really benefiting from those learnings when you choose this option. The other option is the manual targeting option. In this case iAd Workbench provides you the targeting options and you picked what's best for you. You still get the benefit of the optimization except that you've given us the starting point for the optimization.

Let's drill into what are the various manual targeting options. On the left hand side are the various basic targeting options. So gender, age, various age buckets, geotargeting, State and DMA for now, and day of week targeting. These are basic options for advertising. On the right hand side, you can-- you start with device targeting, you can target all the iOS devices that Apple makes. So iPhone, iPod and iPad and iPod touch. Next I want to drill I little bit into user preferences. This is one of the most powerful features that we provide you.

So with user preferences, you target users based on what they download in iTunes and the App Store. So at the top here, hope you can read that, you have apps, movies, music, books and so on. So what does this showing you is what-- if you tar-- choose this option, you're targeting users based on what they download in the App Store. Actual downloads, not just likes, actual downloads. Think about that. If you're a game developer and you want to reach users who've already downloaded games and shown preference for games, you can do that here.

Or let's say your game appeals to action movie fans, you can combine that with a movie preference for action movies. That's the power you're getting. We're using the data from iTunes as well as the App Store to find the right user for your apps. For our example app Klara, which is a productivity app, we're just choosing business, finance, productivity and utilities.

The next preference, next targeting option is app channels. Here you're asking the question, where do you want your ad to run? What you see here is the taxonomy in the App Store. You're determining, what's the context for your ad. You can browse the App Store and see what this context mean.

So when you when you choose these options, you're determining, or you're deciding what's the most relevant context for your ads? For Klara, which is a productivity app and fairly broad based, we've chosen most of the app channels that we have here. Your app may not me relevant in all of these channels, so that's a decision that you need to make. The more channels you pick, the greater the reach for your campaign.

The last option we offer you is App Rating. Some of you might have apps that are not necessarily appropriate in contexts that are 17+. So, you can with the fair-- with the simple filter you can exclude apps that are 17+ from your campaigns. So these are the targeting options that we have under manual targeting, and the burden is on you to pick what's best for you. You always, obviously, have the optimization that comes with it. But you can also pick the Auto Option where iAd Workbench does the heavy lifting for you to find the right users for your app. So two steps down, the third step is to set a budget.

You're answering three questions, how long do you want to run your campaign, how much do you want to spend and at what price? How long? So you're essentially determining what the start date and end date of a campaign. You need to set the duration of your campaign. By default a campaign starts today.

But you can pick any date range that is relevant to you. Maybe you're launching an update for your product or your app. You can pick a date for that. Or perhaps you want to coincide with back to school or Black Friday, whatever. You can choose these options from here.

The next question you're answering is how much? You're setting a budget and a daily spend goal. A budget is what you're willing to spend for the entire campaign. And the daily spend goal is a way for you to control the pacing of your campaign during the entire campaign-- for the duration of the campaign, sorry.

And now we're answering the question what price? Two options that we mentioned before, cost-per-click where you're inputting the maximum that you're willing to pay for a click, so when there's somebody taps on your ad, that's the maximum you're willing to pay. We will not charge you more than that, that's your bid.

Or you can indicate a cost-per-acquisition goal, a CPA goal. Here you have a rough idea as to what you are be willing to pay to acquire a user, or for download from the App Store. You input that and iAd Workbench optimizes to that goal. So you have CPA and CPC that you can choose.

Now you've answered all three questions and we've provide you three answers there. We provide you the impressions, the taps, and the downloads, as an estimate for all your settings. So the targeting that you've chosen, the duration that you've chosen, the budget that you've chosen, and your bid all determine these three numbers. We also have a nifty gauge next to the numbers.

The numbers, the gauge essentially indicates the numbers or your settings in the context of what's available overall. In this case, the needle is all the way to the left telling me that if I had more budget, meaning if I had more than 10,000 dollars to spend, I could substantially increase the number of users for my app. But you-- for now, this is what you get, OK?

So, three steps down, last step or the fourth step is adding banners. As Vineet pointed out, you can upload banners. So if you're-- if you work with creative agency or you have in-house expertise to create banners, you can upload them for all the devices that you're targeting, and you're all set.

But many of you might not have access to creative agencies and may not want to spend even for all of that. You get the benefit of Apple designed beautiful templates here. The templates have been designed to ensure that your app is highlighted in the banners. So we have five templates, each with five colors. So you pick a template, you give it a title, you give it a message, and you give it a call to action. So all-- basically three things that you need to do for your banner and we take care of the rest.

As Vineet pointed out you can see a quick preview of the various sizes that you're getting from the one banner that you selected. These are the various sizes and the various devices that you're targeting. If you want to see how the ads look, appear on the actual devices, you can send an email directly from the application, and using iAd Tester, you can see how your ad appears on the devices. Pretty powerful.

Last step is submitting the campaign. You get on a single page all the options that you've chosen. You obviously see the app, the name of the campaign that you created, the various targeting option that you've chosen, as well as the banners. When you hit Submit, your campaign goes into the creative approval process at Apple.

So that's campaign creation. Now when you create campaigns, obviously you're interested in understanding how they're performing in the App Store, in our marketplace. You want to understand how many downloads you're getting. You're spending good money to acquire those downloads, and you perhaps have chosen various targeting options or various banners for your app, for your campaigns, and you really want to understand the performance of them.

So we provide you a Dashboard and drill downs. Dashboard gives you, on the left hand side, a quick view of what's going on in your application for all your apps. So you can see all the apps and the campaigns that you've created for those apps. You have, at a quick glance, understand how those various campaigns are doing. You can initiate a new campaign as Vineet did from-- directly from the Dashboard.

On the right hand side, you have drill downs. Again, you get granular reporting for all the options that you've chosen. You have the various targeting options that you've chosen. You have also the various banners that you've created for your campaign. You can do understand how these two perhaps targeting options are performing. Or you could also trend them overtime. Lots of rich data comparison tools as well as insightful visuals for you on the drill downs. Rather than me talk about it, let's have Vineet come back and give us a demo of managing performance. Vineet?

Great. Thanks Madhu. So yeah, now we've created our campaign. But now the question is, how do you ensure that your campaign is doing as well as it could? How do you ensure you're maximizing your downloads? Let's go to the Dashboard. On the Dashboard, you see the list of the campaigns that are currently running. So we have three campaigns that are currently running. And within each of the campaigns, you see four key metrics.

The total amount you spent so far on this campaign and you can see how that compares to the budget that you set. The average CPA, again, that was cost-per-acquisition, how much you're paying on average for each additional download? You can compare that to the goal that you set as well.

Average CPC, the actual cost, you're paying per-click on your ad. And if you would set a CPC bid, you would see it here so you could do a comparison as well. And finally, probably the metric you guys care most about the total number of downloads that have resulted from your ad campaign.

So from the Dashboard, you can quickly drill in. Let's take a look at this campaign and see and get a refresher of what exactly this campaign is all about. So for this campaign, we have multiple lines. So we haven't talked about lines yet. Basically a line is a set of targeting options. Madhu went over that various targeting options, gender, age, user preference et cetera.

What you can do is you can group those options together into a single line. You could call it, "Men 18 - 24" or some other combination. And for each line, you can set an independent budget, independent daily spend goal, and an independent CPA goal so you can track how one line is doing against another to see, what is your target market?

And you can quickly flip through multiple lines to see all the different settings that you have. So we have "Men 35 - 49", "Men 50+". So right now, we're breaking it down based on gender and age range. In addition, you can see all of the banners that you have associated with your campaign. We have multiple banners and using multiple different templates to see which one performs the best.

And you can see there's a number up at the top, eight lines. Basically for each of the banners you can choose which lines you want to associate them with. You may have certain banners that may appeal a certain demographics and certain banners that may appeal to different demographics, this way you have the ability to pick and choose which banners will show up to which lines.

OK. So now we've gotten familiar with how this campaign is going. Let's go back to the Dashboard and take a look at how it's performing. We click on Home button and go back to the Dashboard. We are looking at this Klara campaign. Let's drill into spend and see how we're doing on spend.

So when you come to the analytics page, one of the first things you should do is choose what time range you wish to look at. By default we start with today but there's option for yesterday, the last 7 days, the last 30 days, et cetera. Let's go with last 30 days.

Up at the top, you actually see the numbers for your campaign, the full lifetime of your campaign. So you always have that at your fingertips so you can compare not only how you're doing based on the time range that you've chosen but the overall life of the campaign. So now that we've chosen last 30 days, we can see in the graph and you can see how much is being spent across those 30 days. You can choose to graph a different metric, impressions, taps. Let's stick with the average CPA.

So you can see overall average CPA is performing pretty well and then you can overlay a second metric on top of it so you can vary to see how the spend is doing as compared to your average CPA. In addition to the overlays, you can actually click up here, compare with the previous period to see how your spend-- or your average CPA is doing over the previous 30 days or the-- versus the current 30 days.

And finally, you can also click on a tabular view and see all of the detailed information about each of the metrics all at once. And if you would like you can download a CSV file so you can import it into numbers or into Excel and slice and dice it as you wish.

OK, so now from here this was all about the campaign but we can also drill in to see the individual lines as I discussed. When you click on Lines Tab, you see all of the different lines and how they're comparing against each other. You can choose a metric, we can do it base on average CPA again and see that "Men 18 - 24" has higher CPA than "Men 25 - 34".

Right now we graph three lines. You can choose which lines you want. You can unselect 25 - 34 and select "Women 25 - 34" and see how that's doing. And then quickly the graph-- ,oh, it looks like that one has no spend. OK, "Women 35 - 49", so you can see how those three lines are comparing to each other.

And then we have a similar view on the banner side so you can compare how banners are doing against each other. For this campaign, we actually only have one banner that's currently active so you actually only see one banner. You could-- If you don't remember what Marigold Promo actually relates to, you can click on I icon and get a refresher of exactly what this banner is. OK, let's go back to lines and see what optimizations we can do against lines to improve our campaign's performance. OK, let's look at the overall lifetime of the campaign.

So at the bottom of the-- at the bottom of the screen, you see a table which basically has all the different-- all the different metrics that we have. We want to optimize based on the average CPA. We can sort by average CPA which again is how much you're paying on average for additional download.

And we see that these two lines, the average CPA, a dollar sixty-eight and a dollar eighty-four is much less than the 3 dollars that we inputted. So those two lines seem to be performing pretty well. And as you can see, the downloads for those two lines seem to be the best out of those two-- out of all the lines that we have.

So not only are you getting more downloads you're actually paying less for each download, this seems like a good combination. So it would make sense for us to actually add additional spend to these two lines perhaps taking it away from the spend from some of the lines that are not performing as well.

And so this is the power that you have when you're doing manual targeting. But the beauty of Auto is that this-- these optimizations are automatically done by iAd. We automatically figure out which demographics are the ones that are performing best for you giving you maximum downloads and lowest CPA. Back to you Madhu.

All right. Thank you Vineet. So we saw how you can manage your performance. Once you have setup your campaigns, you can go into the tool and manage the performance of those campaigns. So iAd Workbench as I mentioned is available now. We launched it yesterday and many of you already started using it.

But what else could we do? So coming in the Fall, we have iAd Workbench for iOS. So we have it on the iPhone and iPad. Many of you perhaps use iTunes Connect Mobile for managing your apps on the go in the App Store. Now the same app with the additional iAd tab can be used to manage your campaigns on the go.

So what are the key features here? You have access to actionable information. So the same dashboard and drill downs that we saw on the web application are also available on the iOS devices. But they are customized obviously for touch. And you will see Mike giving us a demo of that.

We also have alerts and notifications which is really important-- which are really important in the mobile context. We will tell you what's going on with your account or with your campaign on the go so you can take action. The action can be updating dates, so if you want to extend your campaign or extend your budgets, change your bid based on the alerts that you might get or based on the performance you might want to pause or unpause any of the campaigns, lines or banners that you have running. So all of the functionality that you see on the web for managing and optimizing your campaigns is also available for you on iOS. So its coming this Fall but Mike can do a demo for us now. Mike?

Thank you. So this is the iTunes Connect Mobile application and I'm sure a lot of you are familiar with. Let's fire it up. And we'll sign in with our Apple ID. And the first thing you'll notice that on the bottom, there's now iAd tab that wasn't there before.

And this is the campaign Dashboard page. It shows all the campaigns that we have. You can see some brief info about them, their name, their status, their flight dates. You can sort them by running, not running, or completed. Let's have a look at the first campaign here BB iPad1. We'll tap that.

These are the campaign detail page. At the top you will see-- again, see some basic information about this campaign, the name, the flight dates, the status. Down the bottom you'll see all your campaign results to date. So you will your spend in relation to your budget, your average CPC, your average CPA and your CPA goal and downloads. And if you wanted to see how these metrics accrued over time, you can swipe the table to the left and you see a beautiful graph of the data. So this is for spend, average CPC, average CPA and downloads.

By default, it's showing the last 24 hour period. You can also change the time period for seven days, 30 days or for the lifetime of your campaign. If you want to see the graph in more detail you can rotate your device to landscape and see the graph in full screen. All the same graphs that were available in portrait are available in landscape.

If you just want to jump to a specific graph and not want to have to swipe through to find it, you can just tap that metric in the table view. So if we want to jump quickly to spend, we can just tap on that and look at the spend graph. Let's switch back to portrait.

In the middle of the screen you'll notice two buttons, one for line items and one for banners. Use for the line items associated worth this campaign and for the banners. Let's look at the line items. This shows the three line items that I have associated with this campaign. You'll see the name, the flight dates, the status and the spent in relation to the budget. Let's tap into the first one.

This shows the line detail screen, very similar to the campaign detail screen. We will see some basic information at the top about the status, the flight dates and you will the results to date down the bottom. You will be able to see the spend in relation to the budget, the average CPC, CPA and downloads. And of course you can swipe them to get the graphs.

In the middle section there's a button for banners. This will show us all the banners we have associated with this particular campaign. So let's tap that and have a look. There're two banners associated with this campaign and its showing us the spend on both of those. Let's tap and look at the first one.

This is the banner detail very similar to the campaign detail and line detail. We're going to have some basic information about the banner at the top, its status, and down the bottom you'll have the banner results to date. And again, you can swipe over and look at the graphs for the various data.

Now you notice in the top right corner there there's a Pause button. You'll be able to pause and restart your banner directly from your device. So let's pause this banner. It'll ask us if we want to continue. Yes. And now the banner is paused. If we want to restart the banner, we can just tap Restart and continue and the banner is now restarted. Let's go back to the campaign Dashboard page by tapping the tab at the bottom.

And you may have noticed at the top it's telling us that one of our campaigns may need attention. And the second campaign, Prod Pack Promo has an Alert icon next to it, signifying that that is the campaign that has a problem. So let's tap that and have a look.

You'll notice on the lines button, there's another alert button, another alert icon. So it's telling us that one of our line items has a problem. So, let's tap it and check it out. We have eight line items associated with this campaign and you'll notice that two of them have the alert icon, so two of the lines have a problem. Let's look at the second one.

And there we go. At the top, it's telling us exactly what the problem is. It's saying a bid amount may not be sufficient to reach our campaign goal. So that definitely seems like something we should fix. So on the top right corner of the screen you'll notice an Edit button. Let's tap that and edit this line item.

So this is the line item editor. In here, you can change the end date, the budget, your max daily spend and you CPA goal. And you notice down the bottom, you can also pause the line or restart the line much like you can with banners. So, you can also see down at the bottom on the CPA goal line there's the alert icon. That letting us know that that is a particular line that we need to change. So, let's tap on that to edit it.

This will bring up a standard keypad but we've added two custom buttons in there for you, a plus 5 percent and a minus 5 percent so you can quickly change your value by 5 percent increments. So let's add 5 percent. Nah, let's bump it up another 5 percent. When you're satisfied with all the values and you want to save it, just touch the Done button and the values are now saved. So these are just some of the features that will be available in new iAd module within iTunes Connect Mobile coming in the Fall.

[ Applause ]

Thank you Mike. So it's coming in the fall. But iAd Workbench is already available and thousands of you are already using it. So get started with iAd Workbench. It's cool, huh? iadworkbench.apple.com, we are in the labs. We can help you get started or you can start with your developer accounts.

So some quick housekeeping, there are related iAd sessions about iAd Producer tomorrow and on Thursday there's iAd Integration to those of you who are publishers. And for more information you have Mark Malone, the wonderful, for any questions you have on iAd. And you can always go to Apple Developer Forums. Thank you and have a great WWDC.

[ Silence ]
