---
Title:  What's New in iBooks Author
Year:   2013
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2013/605/

[!] This transcript has potential transcription errors.
---

We have audience participation. Look at that! That's great. Yehey! [applause] It's working together. We have achieved something here today. All right. What's new in iBooks Author? Great. So today's agenda, I'm going to give you a demo of iBooks for the Mac. It's going to be a little bit more in depth than what Craig showed yesterday during the keynote, although it showed amazing well. They were very proud of it. I'm going to show you iBooks Author 2.0 as I promised I would do.

And through that you're going to learn how to do a few different things. You can learn how to create your own templates, how to build interactive content. You're going to discover the new widgets and learn how to apply them effectively. I'm going to show you how to publish books directly within iBooks Author.

It's one of the features we added in version 2.0, and also show you how to version your book directly from within iBooks Author. And then hopefully along the way, we're going to pick up some skills that you wouldn't have come here with that will enable you to create books in a very efficient manner.

First, a recap. So we launched the iBooks Multi-Touch Experience in January of 2012 with the intent of kind of revolutionizing textbooks. And our vision was that through the iPad, we could create a new generation of-- new version of education materials that did a lot more than their printed counterparts by making it a more multimedia experience, a more explorative experience that obviously textbooks can be in their static guise. So this is an example of what our textbooks look like. You can see they're very visually rich. You can't tell here of course, but they're very touch-interactive. These callouts, for example, the interactive image I can interact with and explore different facets of that underlying image very easily.

So we've achieved a few of our goals that we'd set out to accomplish. So far, we've got thousands of textbooks published to the iBooks store. We have an excess, I think at this point, of 22,000 titles on the bookstore today, Multi-Touch titles, which includes publications from all of the major textbooks publishers, Pearson, McGraw-Hill, Houghton Mifflin, and a bunch of independent publishers, you may be some of them, thousands of those worldwide. We've got 100 percent coverage of the high school core, common core curriculum in the United States. We have over 2,500 classrooms in the US using these Multi-Touch textbooks today. And now we have books available in the US, in Canada, Australia, and the UK.

So really proud of our achievements there. And here're some examples of the kinds of textbooks that are being published today. Shakespeare like you've never known it before, the Shakespearience. Just give round of applause for the Shakespeariemce folks right now. By making judicious use of media and interacted experiences, it allows you to kind of explore and experience Shakespeare in a way you never, ever could before.

The Houghton Mifflin's biology, Richard Feynman's Six Easy Pieces, it's-that's a bald face lie of a title, but whatever. Core-- Core Class Life Science, our course E. O. Wilson's Life on Earth, I could go on. But in addition to those educational titles, we're seeing books in many other categories find their way to the iBooks store. Publishers have found this platform and are using it to showcase titles that are from different categories altogether. So from Random House, we have Tyler Florence's Fresh book, which through interactive content allows you to explore these recipes in kind of a different way.

They've even got smart things like an HTML widget at the end of the book that allows you to calculate the ingredients that you're going to need given the number of servings that you need to serve. Jessica Alba's lifestyle book, The Honest Life, a book she managed to published on her own despite my repeated attempt to help her.

The Rolling Stones, 50-year-- 50 years of the Rolling Stones, it's an amazing multimedia book, a great back scenes, behind the scenes kind of view point of the band. Linda McCartney's photographic, just published by Taschen, very happy to see that get published. DK, one of our most prolific publishers with amazing animals, I think they've got-- well, over 40 titles now around. I might be lying about that. Don't quote me, but just a lot of titles.

Amongst those other titles, we have books that are somewhat technical in nature which may be the kinds of things that maybe you're hoping to do out there spans the gamut from, like, gaming guides to user guides. Here we have a Canon Mark 5D user guide. I see a couple of titles here that are going to need updating just based on revelations from this very conference, that guy notably. But you get the picture. If you've got something to say and the materials to say it with, you can put a book together. You can publish to the iBookstore and get the message out.

And now, you're not just getting the message out on the iPad, you're also getting it out via the Mac. So without further adieu, I'm going to give you a little demo of iBooks for the Mac. All right, so this is my new Mavericks desktop. I'm going to click the shiny new iBooks icon, up pops my Library.

Here all the books in my Library which I can browse a number of different ways. It's going to point out the buttons on the toolbar here so everyone is familiarized with the UI. This is the Store button. I dare not press it today for this demo but when you do click it, we're shipping-- you'll flip over to the iBooks store and you'll get the complete iBooks experience and if you shop in context, the same way you do within iTunes today.

Next we have a set of tabs that allows me to kind of look at my books in a different way. So I can click on the collections tab, see all my purchased books, see just my textbooks, see my fiction books, and so on. I can view by author, I can view by genre or I can view in a list view which hasn't built out yet.

Obviously the books are all searchable. I can sort them in different ways, can sort them alphabetically which will make more sense when I turn on the labels. You have a number of different options for viewing your books. So let's get into one of our book experiences. The first one I'm going to show you is Curiosity. And this book kind of exemplifies why we built iBooks Author.

Because the gentleman who published this book-- his name is Patrick Lister is not a book publisher. [Background Music] He's not a book designer. His background is in engineering, but he has a fondness and love for the Mars Exploration Program and thought he could showcase it in a book which he's absolutely done. And he's created a beautiful experience.

So there you saw the intermedia which you may recognize or remember from the iPad. When it plays through, I'm brought to the graphical table of contents view, it's exactly the same as the iPad and it's a good place to call out evidence that you built for one platform and you get the benefit of having it run on multiple platforms. So it's going to work on the iPad. It's going to work here. You don't have to do anything special.

Also the methods of interacting with the content on the iPad have transferred. So here I'm using my Macbook Pro and I've got a trackpad with it. So if I want to swipe through my chapters, I can just swipe using my fingers on the trackpad and away I go. I can also swipe through the thumbnails down here at the bottom, decide where I want to go and just click there. Let's start with page 1. So here, I swiped to page 2. There's a movie. [Background Music] I can play that movie in place.

[ Music ]

I can also expand that movie--

- It was this really amazing moment--
- So it fills the window if I want to make that window larger, I can. That's great. You'll note here that we've actually overtaken the toolbar here. So it's an edge to edge experience-- to full bleed experience for media. We want it to maximize the impact of that media on the page.

When I'm done, I just click Done and I'm back to the page. An example of some beautiful typographic treatment that Patrick has integrated within his book, we're going to replicate that later on so I'm drawing your attention to it, kind of right now. Next, we have gallery. You can swipe through the images of the gallery in place. I can click on individual thumbs. I can go full-screen. I can do all of that stuff and you can see the experiences very complete. If I pause for a second, the UI fades away and then you can really feel that completeness of the image.

Scanning over on our pages a little bit. Here we've got a 3D element, interact with Mars, spin it around, which I love to do and of course here it's identifying all the landing points for the various rovers and landers that have spotted Mars over the years. Next, I want to show you an example of something that's found on another page.

To get back to the graphical table of contents view with the trackpad, I simply pinch, same convention as the iPad. And now I can scan ahead to the next chapter, click on the contents of the next chapter, and find a page that I've bookmarked. Here it is. So whenever you bookmarked a page in iBooks for the Mac, you see a red bookmark represented on your thumbnail.

So I want to show you this guy 'cause this is an HTML widget that is really effectively used and it's a good example of when you should choose to use HTML to have kind of a unique experience. So here, it's a timeline of Mars exploration. So I can actually scroll down here with the trackpad, click on an event in the timeline or I can use these little previous, next navigators to get to a place. It's really quite beautiful and impactful and no reason-- well, they have every reason, Patrick had every reason not use a conventional widget but rather do something in it's own in this case.

And I hit Escape and I'm out. So this page is bookmarked. If I rollover the toolbar area up here. You'll see that we have a few different icons that appear within the toolbar. I can see this page is bookmarked. If I click the arrow just to the right of it, I see that I've got some other things earmarked. I'm going to choose one-- actually I'm not going to choose one right now. Let me show you the pop-over widget first.

So, here you can't really tell but this is more than just a static image. Patrick used the pop-over widget to provide some additional information about the where the world's radio broadcast here. So, the sidebar widget and the pop-over widget are widgets that are great for kind of condensing the amount of information that you get on a page. So if you have a side story that you need to tell, you can tell it really well using these widgets.

I want to show that everything is clickable. You can click on an image, it's brought full-screen. You can examine it in full glory. Every image that we save out in iBooks Author is taking iPad Retina Displays into accounts which means you have overhead for users to kind of zoom in and explore images, and really get the most from them.

All right. So next I'm going to switch gears and show you another title. No, I'm not going to do that either. I'm going to search for something. So Johannes Kepler, who had a lot to say about planetary motion. In here, I mentioned a sidebar. This is where I want to show the sidebar. So the sidebar here is a scrolling sidebar, looks and feels a lot like the pop-over widget I just showed, except that always occupies a place on the page, but again, a very great way to kind of collapse information within any given page.

And now I really will switch to go show you another title. So I click this little Toolbar icon at the left, it represents the Library up comes the Library. I'm going to close this guy. Now I'm going to show Richard Feynman's Six Easy Pieces, like I told you very much a lie.

- [Background Music] Things on a very small scale behave-- -
- All right. So [inaudible] for me the experience, apparently Richard Feynman was as fond of bongos as he was theoretical physics. Who knew? It's the same deal once you get into the chapter view, of course, from scrolling ahead, there's something I want to show here in Chapter 2, and I know I bookmarked that page.

What I'm going to show you now is two different guises of this audio widget, which is in fact, the media widget. So here we see the standard playback control that you may remember from version 1 of iBooks Multi-Touch Books. So this is great for long form audio if you have something that users may need to scrub through or want to zap to a specific point within. The scrubber is a great way to kind of support that activity. But that's not appropriate for all audio links. Here, we have another version of the audio widget. It's in the button the mode. And when I click it--

- So we gradually try to analyze all this trying to put together things which at first sight look different with the hope that we maybe able to reduce the thing and understand it better.
- Obviously, you didn't hear any of that. But you saw the radio playback. You saw that it was giving you feedback about the length of the content. And that content was the right-- or this button interaction was the right way to represent audio of that duration. But what I really want to show you in this title are our note taking features to-- so I'm going to launch our pop-over table of contents view. So this is another kind of table of contents view. You saw the graphical table contents view. This represents all of the contents of your book as a list and it's analogous to the portrait table of contents from the iPad.

So I can expand in chapter and click on a location and I'm brought to that page within the book. And you'll note that down here, what appeared in this little placard is basically a kind of snapback UI or history UI that would allow me to get back to my previous location. So if I'm following a hyperlink, or exploring something in kind of a free form way. I can get back to previous location very quickly.

But here as I mentioned, I want to show you our highlights and notes. So I have a highlight and a corresponding note. If I want to view the contents of that note, I can click on it and that note will appear in place. If I want to create a highlight and a note, I can simply draw out a selection range and then up will pop this little highlighting menu, and then via that menu I can just hit Add Note.

And there I've added my note. There's another method for creating a highlight in very quick fashion, too. That's using the command key as modifier. It was a shortcut rather. And with it, I can just simply draw out my highlight, click on it again, change the color, and you get the idea.

Now whenever you resize the window, we're trying do a couple of smart things. So you'll note that, when the window is fit to the page size and it kind of roll over the margins, these little page affordances, paging affordances appear in the page margin. If I make the window just a little bit larger, you'll see that they actually appear on the outside, it will allow me to page.

If I make the window larger still, you can see that the notes are telegraphing that they're going to appear in the margin for me. So if ever I need to review my notes in context, this is a great and efficient way to be able to do that. Then I can simply page through and view all these notes in line.

But wait, there's more. If I make the window larger still, you can see that there's a little page trying to peek out in the background. When the window gets big enough, I get Two Up mode which is awesome. And then, of course, if you want it all, you can have Two Up, notes in margins and you're good to go, making really great use of the Mac's overall resolution and the ability to resize windows. We also have a notes view.

So up here in the toolbar, you click on the second icon from left and it will come the notes view or the notes panel. And within it, I have-- or can see all of the notes across all the chapters in the book. Only those chapters that have notes are represented in this view.

But if I want to quickly find a note, I can scan to a location, click this button, and, of course, that page, and I click this button, of course, it's only one page away. I will click this button and boom, I just warped to another part of the book. All together, if I want to edit a note in place, I can do this. And I'm good to go. And then, if I want to get back to the previous location, where we were before, I click on that and there I am.

Finally, when it comes time to review my notes and to study the contents preparing for a test, we brought over the study cards that you may remember from the iPad. So here's a set of study cards that are derived from my highlights and my notes. There are no glossary terms defined for this particular book. But if they were, they would appear here in line with my own notes and highlights. But in order to move through the cards, I can simply swipe with the track pad, click to flip the card.

I've heard it said a number of times, but I wish I had this if when I was in school about 20 years ago. You can also filter these down, so it's just your glossary terms or highlights of any given color, a very powerful tool for studying and we think this is going to be a great boon for students who used their Mac in studying contexts. So that's it for our tour of iBooks for the Mac and to switch back to my slides.

So all of that content was enabled with this tool, iBooks Author, textbooks, cook books, photography anthologies, anything that is visual in nature is fair game for iBooks Author and anything that could be extended with media is also fair game for iBooks Author. So what is it? Well, it's a tool for creating exactly that kind of content, it's a WYSIWYG in dragg-and-drop editor, we try and stayed-- we stayed very true to those kind of interaction principles throughout the system and all the workflows it supports.

So with those paradigms in mind, you can write edit and import text. You can add graphics, you can customize page layouts, you can make the thing look and feel exactly as you need it. You can also create these interactive experiences using basic media like images, video, and audio, just using basic drag and drop techniques. It works for single publishers.

It also works for professional publishing pipelines where you have many users collaborating around a single book. And probably, the biggest incentive this, of course, it's free. We're not asking you to shell out lots of cash. We are however asking you to publish to the iBooks store. So please do that.

Why would you choose to use this particular platform over other competitive choices that you may have and that are open to you? Well, you can create these immersive iPad experiences without code and these are experiences that are designed for the iPad. So all of that work and thought and experience in designing the iPad itself is being translated directly here.

So when we design a widget, you can be assured that you're going to get a very equality experience at the end when the users actually interact with your content. But we provide flexibility for you to go out on your own and create these great unique experiences like the timeline I showed you from Patrick Lister's book when you need to, just using HTML widget and HTML5. As I mentioned, it's designed to work perfectly on the iPad. But now, of course, the Mac create-- wants published in many places or have it to be consumed to many places.

You get true layout and type setting, so things looked like real books but they feel like something else. They feel like something it's truly interactive. And the sum-- total of which leads to this statement, which is bold, but it is my opinion. It's the best platform for creating interactive media rich books, that's out there today. You can't do it with ePub. You can't do it with PDF. Of course, not in the way that you can with iBooks Author in the .ibooks format.

So what's new in iBooks Author 2.0? What kind of stuff you're going to see today? We introduced portrait-fixed layout books. Our first version of the books where in a landscape flavor, there was a portrait flow mode that was kind of an optional mode that was enabled by turning the iPad into a portrait orientation. But now, portrait-fixed layout books, you can layout something that fills a lot more like a book. We have introduced two math typesettings using LaTeX and MathML.

We are optimizing media automatically. So when you drag in a piece of media, you don't have to precompress it, we're going to do that for you. We're also going to transcode it to the right format. So you don't run in any glitches when you're uploading to the iBooks store and your content will get refused as a result.

We've got new widgets, I showed you the pop-over widget, I showed you the scrolling sidebar widget, and the new audio widget modes. The enhanced publishing workflow with the support for versioning which is very important when you want to update your book. Basically, we're trying to transform people's-- I don't want to say it-- understanding of books and make them feel more evergreen in nature.

So like apps can be updated on an ongoing basis and content and new value can continue to be added to your-- for your users. You can do that now with iBooks books. And we also now support embedded font, so you really can get that crisp, custom look that you're looking for.

All right. So now on to part 2. Let me show you how to build this great stuff using iBooks Author. Now there are few points I want to leave you with today. Probably, the most important of them is this, when you sit down to write your book or compose your book within iBooks Author, you really should have written your book first. You can sit down and start typing away and you can craft your book. And you'll get there and you'll be able to do it with little difficulty, but it won't put you on the great place to make changes down the line.

So what we recommend to do is that you do two things. You write your book first, your write it with your interactive content in mind to know what you want to do when you sit down to compose with in iBooks Author. And then finally, we ask that you-- or recommend rather that you build your template first. Building your template will allow you to make those kinds of changes late in the editorial process when you need to. It will help support multiuser or collaboration workflows when you're working with many people, you know, just make your life a lot easier, trust me.

So our content here that I'm choosing to replicate is that Curiosity book that we'd shown. So in order to replicate it, I'm going to try and find a template here that roughly approximates Patrick's look and feel, nothing is identical to it. So up here, we have a collection of landscape templates which I can choose. Down here, we have the portrait fix layout templates which we introduced with version 2.0. It's a landscape book that we're going to create and this is the template we're going to chose to create it.

So when you launch a template we're putting you in a place where if you want to start creating your book, you can kind of just get under way and start building things. We're not going to do that right here now that we're going to build our template first as I recommended.

But first, let's take a look at the UI of iBooks Author. So if any of you are users of Pages, Keynote, or Numbers, do we have those users out there, are they out there, and so we'd like to see. This is going to feel familiar, right. It's the same framework that you recognize from those tools.

Not only as the UI framework the same, the underlying objects are the same. So when you create a table in Numbers and you paste it in here, you're getting that table, we don't support things like computation within those tables, but the table will come over. If you create graph, any graphic elements, in any of those applications, you can copy and paste them here and stuff, is just going to work.

So going left to right across our toolbar, if you want to add content to your book, you do it by the Add Pages button. And as I'm rolling over these different objects, I'm seeing a bunch of layouts that correspond with these objects. These objects are also describing the structure of an iBooks book.

At the highest level of the book, there is the chapter, beneath the chapter, there's the section, a section contains pages. So here's the chapter, it's top to your item, second to your section, and then finally, discreet page layouts which I can apply. Be delving into that further in just a little bit.

Next up, the View switch, used this to turn on or off different user interface elements within iBooks Author. So for example, if I wanted to change my sidebar to an outline view, instead of thumbnails, I could do that. I could turn on or off the Format bar, but I'm going to turn that on because that's actually going to help us edit more quickly.

The Orientation switch which allows me to switch between the portrait flow mode that is used only on the iPad, it's not used on iBooks for Mac in landscape. We won't go into that today. I'm not going to touch on anything having to do with portrait flow mode here today.

But if-- should you want to learn more, I recommend going back to last year's session where I go into great detail about how to work with portrait flow mode, that's available online in the developer website. Next up, we have a graphic create tools, I need text, I add a text box.

If I want to add a graphic shape, I can have a graphic shape, create a table, add a chart, you can add any of the numbers, any of the widgets that we shift with. Here they are all nine of them. I can preview. I'll show you how to preview a little bit later and I can also publish, we'll be going through the publish workflow in a little bit. Finally, there's the Inspector.

Well not finally. We also have the system edit panels, font color and media. We won't use those. But the Inspector is very important. The Inspector is the thing that used to edit the attributes of any object that you select within the canvas. So when you're composing things right here and you're editing things and you're moving stuff around, this is where you edit the attributes of the said things. So it's good to get to know the Inspector.

Now to round out our tour, over here we have the sidebar, it's got some special nodes contained within it, the top most node is our cover. This is where we can compose and build our cover that will get shift out when we go to publish our book. And we have a spot for Intro Media, so that splashy video intro that you saw for both of the books. This is where you would add it, just by dragging in a movie.

We have the table of contents authoring environments, so you can build out your table of contents here and create a custom look and feel for it. And then finally, we have the glossary. All right. So let's get start-- started building. I'm going to open another document just for reference.

So just to remind myself, what Patrick's book looked like I'm going to call this up from a time to time. Now I should make that a lot smaller. All right. So this is an example of this very same page. It's similar and that is got a very full-bleed image, but the title is completely different. It's got this background element here. We don't want any of that. So let's go edit it away right now.

So the first thing I'm going to do, just because, you now, it's my book, I want to see what it feels like a little bit. I'm going to drag in my image from my chapter and that kind of feels good. I'm going to edit the title, OK, the long-- Great. So it sort of feels like my book, but not close enough.

In order to make it really look like the book, I'm going to have to change the layout that this page references. So to view my layouts, you can do one of two ways. You can go to the view menu where I told you, you can turn on or off different UI elements and go show layouts. Or you can simply split this bar down. It's just living behind your page thumbnails.

And this little check mark indicates that this is the layout that's being utilized for this very page right now. But there are two pages associated with chapter and section layouts and I'll explain what they are. The first page is always the splash page. It's the visual thing that identifies an incoming chapter or a section. And then, the second page is a body page which is used to create all of the text pages within that chapter or section as the case may be. So when you import text and random pages are created for you automatically, that's the page that's being reference.

Well, here's a layout that looks a little bit more like the one we want. I'm going to actually apply it right now. Looks a little bit better. It's still not the thing that we need. So I'm going to edit the contents of the layout right now. So in the Inspector, I'm going to switch over to the Layout tab. And within the Layout tab, I find the attributes for layout objects. Layout objects are anything that lives inside your layout. When I select this background image it tells me a few different things about what it set up to do.

So this first check box enables the-- well, me as the book creator to basically edit this content on the page. If didn't check this box and I apply these changes, I would be unable to edit or modify or even select that thing anymore on the page. So I'm just going to undo that change.

It has a special tag. This main image tag is what we used to identify images that will also be used in the table of contents view. So follow me just for a second. If I switch over to the table of contents view, you can see that two things have happened. The background image that we have supplied for the chapter was used here and the title that we entered onto the chapter head page is also being used in the table of contents view.

So you might be asking yourself, how do iBooks Author know to make that the title for the chapter? It knew to make that the title for the chapter because it was using something called a section title smart field which this thing is. It has a telltale visual cue which is kind of hard to see here in this display or in this composition.

But basically, it's a blue outline that surrounds that word. And what this field is used to do is basically name the thing that it's currently applied to. So what we're telling the smart field to do is to name every chapter it's applied to, it either reflects the name if you put it in somewhere or it allows you to edit the name directly in place.

So when I went and edited the name here, that's how it got all the way over to the table of contents view. And if something goes wacky in your setup, and you should accidentally delete this thing and delete the other thing, don't freak out. You can very easily create another one by going to the insert panel and selecting section title and you're often running yet again.

What we need to do here, I'm going to preserve those elements is restyle these things, so it looks a little bit more like Patrick's design. He used the Avenir font, it's going to very quickly select the Avenir font. And he used basically one lockup for the chapter and the chapter numbers. I'm going to delete the second thing here.

And then, I'm going to insert another smart field which we called the section-- numbering smart field. The section numbering smart field is a dynamic thing, but you don't edit things in it, it just reflects the title or the name of the thing and the number of the thing that it is applied to. So if I insert section number here, it comes up by default telling me, "Hey, I'm Chapter 1." But I just want it to be a number. So I say, hey, give me the number only.

And then I believe Patrick had this as an orange element, I know full well, he did, blind you guys. I've applied the changes and that we have something that looks a lot more like what Patrick had in his book. So we've just finished editing our chapter head page.

Now the body page has a couple of different things. You can't really see it right now. Down here, we've got a page number element and up here we've got the body text container which you can't see. Now Patrick's pages featured a black background, I'm going to create one here by simply adding a graphic form.

You can't see what I'm doing here. I'm using a hotkey to push this object into the back. Now I'm going to just make the body text white. So we can see it. And now we have edited the wrong thing. That's OK. Did anyone see me making that mistake, hands up if you saw me making that mistake. That's good eyes, good, thank you. Call it out next time though 'cause I get really farther. Let's copy and paste that stuff, add text container because that guy won't come over.

All right. Now we're back on track. OK. So we now fully edited-- sorry, don't get confused by that again. I was going to delete him so I can't make the mistake again. We've now fully edited that body page. So if the chapter needs to create pages, it can do so. And they're going to look exactly like we need them. Next up, we're going to create the section page.

And one of the benefits of working with the templates that we've provided as the iBooks group is that we have done all of the thinking around, you know, what's the best point size for the iPad, what are the best page layouts for the iPad that give the right proportions of white space to the actual text content. So it's in your best interest that kind of work with the layouts that we provide and customize them in exactly the way that I'm showing right now.

We do this because we don't want you putting unnecessary effort if you are a real book designer and you want to completely custom, you can go ahead and do that. But for the rest of us, it's nice to have these starting places. And that's the setup for me saying, "Hey, don't go and rebuild a section from scratch the way that we just did the chapter."

If you want to create a new section, you can just duplicate the thing we've already created which has most of the stuff that we need and drag it over to the section layouts area and now we have a new section layout. We don't need this thing. We will need this thing. And we're going to need another one of these black things.

And there you go. Now the only problem with this is, it's currently setup is that that chapter-- that section numbering field that we set up, is currently pointing at the chapter we want it to actually point at a section. So we can double-click to edit it, specify section and we're pretty much good to go at this point.

Now, I'm going to remind us again what Patrick has done in other areas of the book. I think, I can actually tour that guy down. He has these large quotation-- sorry-- he has these quotations that are rendered in large or in text, orange text, do you remember that when I showed that in the original run through. I'm going to go very quickly create that text box to contain that quote.

But I chose a ginormous point size. That's pretty ginormous. Maybe not that ginormous, a little smaller. There you go. To make sure that we can edit it later when we're actually composing the pages, I mark it as editable. And I'm going to give a custom tag. Now the benefit of using tag is that when it comes time to switch out layouts, if you got multiple layouts that can all be applied in similar content. If you tag things the same way throughout the layouts, they'll actually inherit the contents between the layouts which is kind of nice.

And then finally, there's the attribution which I'm not going to bother adding right now 'cause I want get underway building our book. But we're basically done. We've created two layouts now that through which we're going to be able to compose the rest of our chapter. So now I can go to our add pages menu, add our new section layout. Actually, I'm not going to do that.

Do something even better. I'm going to bring in the Pages document that contains all of my text for this chapter and just drag it into the sidebar. When I do, iBooks Author prompts me to choose a layout and in this way it tells iBooks Author what level this content is going to live at. We want this to be a section. It's a little bit different from Patrick's book. He only had chapters, but I want to show a little bit of the book structure and hierarchy here.

Note also this check box. If you have crafted-- and many people do this, painstakingly so, if you crafted paragraphs styles in your document that you want to preserve, you're going to want to check this box. And when you do that, all of the incoming paragraph styles will merge with the paragraph styles from the template and you'll have them, but we're also smart enough to recognize when they've been named the same. So you won't have duplicate paragraph styles. We'll just keep the ones that are incoming.

So there you have it. We've created a run of pages all from the layouts that we just created. I'm not sure how long it took us to create those layouts, but something in the order of 10 to 15 minutes. And you would also want to create some custom page layouts which you could apply to your book throughout.

That's going to take some additional time. But suffice to say, you can do this kind of thing very quickly. So I'd embedded the quotations that we need here over there. Copy that text and just paste it, I should have done that attribution as another element. Forget that. We're going to name this section.

So great, it's named on the page. But as I mentioned, because we're using those naming smart field, I'm actually identifying the components of my book. So now if we switch back to our table of contents view, we can see that we have three sections created within our chapter, the first of which I've actually named.

Did I actually do that? No, I didn't. I fell into a trap of my-- literally my own design, literally my own designs. It's-- I'm not proud of this fact. OK. So if you should see that that blue line has gone away, it's evidence that you've wiped out that section naming smart field and you need to recreate it. So I've just undone that mistake. And now we see that the thing is kind of correctly named and I also undo that resize there, but there you go.

Now while we're looking at the table of contents view, this is the area where you can obviously customize the table of contents experience. The only caveat being that what you do for one chapter, you do for all chapters. So if I'm going to delete this background and then restyle my text and do whatever I needed to do, it has to work for all of the chapters of my book because it's going to be shared amongst them when the user is swiping through in the graphical table of contents.

The next thing that you're going to want to do to define the structure of your book is through something that we call semantic paragraph styles. So books have subjects or headings contained within things like chapters. And you want to identify these things to iBooks Author so that when the user searches for them in the book. We can bring them to the right place, the places that matter-- that matter most.

There are three components to any templates. There're the layouts that are contained with in it. There are the object styles that are preserved within it. And then there are the paragraph styles that it owns. If you want to view the paragraph styles for template, you can do one of two ways.

You can click to view the paragraph styles drawer and here you can see them all here. Also your character styles and list styles are preserved there. So I'm going to apply the heading one, paragraph style to this text and it's been adopted. The font is incorrect, so I'm going to change it, Avenirs I did before.

Make that a little bit smaller. And now what we'll see-- see this little red arrow in the paragraph styles drawer, this indicates that the paragraph style that that text think it-- thinks it is, is different than what the text actually is right now. We've overwritten that paragraph style.

If we want everything to have this new paragraph style that we just defined, we can select this via that menu, redefine style from selection. Now every time we come across a heading that we want to apply that style to we've got the new style and that's great. All right.

So how about the interactive stuff, we've got some content over here. I'm going to close my paragraph style drawer first, bring in some new content. The first and most basic of the interactive elements is the simple and humble image. And insert a page break here quickly, so we're just looking at that image. This image, we know it's special, iBooks Author doesn't know it's special. The way that you make this special so that people can actually interact with it is you go over here to the Widget tab in the Inspector.

And within this Widget tab, you'll find the attributes of interactive things. So there are two ways to make this thing actually interactive, you can add a title to it or a caption and that's evidence enough that you think this is special. So when a user taps on it, it's going to go full-screen for them or go to the expanded state.

You can also just check this box which is make zoomable in iBooks. So if you didn't have a title or caption, you can check this box. And then, when a user clicks or taps on that thing, they'll be able to see it in kind of an expanded state.

But I'm going to leave the title and caption there. Next up, I'm going to show you another of the version 2.0 features which is our support for LaTeX and MathML. So in order to do that, I'm going to place my cursor here, you access the equation input user experience through the Insert panel, I'm going to insert equation and up will pop our Equation Editor. And I hope to God, I can remember this equation. So for circular pads, the equation is something like 2 [inaudible] 3.

There you go. You can see this preview area that I've successfully entered an equation. My mother would be very proud of me. If you edit it in such a way that the equation becomes invalid-- we just redo what I've done-- like put the hat without completing that statement. You can see it, it shows as an invalid equation. But once it's done, I can insert it. This is proper text. I can edit it. I can give it a new size.

I can send or justify it. So real math type setting now within iBooks Author, also works for MathML. Trust me. I'm not going to show you that right now. Next up, I want to show you the scrolling sidebar widget. I mentioned that's a great way to do something like tell a historical aside like I'm going to do for Johannes Kepler.

So this is very simple, just drag in some text, boom; drag in an image, double boom. He's not a very happy looking man, but he was brilliant. You can also style this. It's a graphic object like any other graphic object within iBooks Author. So if I want to give this a black background fill and make my text white like the rest of my content, I can do so. So there you have it. There's the scrolling sidebar widget. Now finally, I'm going to add one more page which I think, just going to add a blank page here and add a final widget. It's going to be the timeline widget that we saw before.

Now the timeline widget is a full-screen-only experience which means that you have to tap on the element that's shown on the page before you can interact with the HTML. You can, however, preview HTML most of the time within iBooks Author. I can't do with this widget. But if you hit Edit HTML, you're brought to an environment where you can actually preview the HTML. It's not going to work, as I mentioned, for this widget. You click Done when you're done. But there's our HTML widget in place.

Now that's our first section of three sections built out. I can go-- click back to the table of contents. Say yes, everything is going according to plan. I'm going to paste in our quote. I expect you're following along now. So I'm going to move a lot more quickly. Choose that heading style that we applied or that we created. Oh, did I actually ever prove to you that we were doing something special with that heading style?

- Yes.
- Did I? OK. Did I switch over to the sidebar to do that? [Inaudible Response]
- Thank you. So let's switch to the outline view. You can see here, that's the evidence that those semantic paragraph styles are doing their job. So when I go to that table of contents view, the pop-over table of contents view in iBooks, I'm going to see that stuff listed there and that's the way that it gets there using that semantic paragraph style. Thank you, phantom voice from the audience.
- You're welcome. [Laughter]
- All right. So let's add some more interactive stuff. We're pressed for times. So I'm going to do this quickly. Next up, we'll set a movie, it's very easy to do, right? If you got a movie, slam it in there. The attributes for the movie are limited. I can click over to the Widget tab and see that I have the option to show these things. The thumbnail-only which means it would be just stay proxy on the page, and I'll click that proxy and the movie will only play in full-screen. But we want it to play in place. I can also choose the poster frame that I want.

That's exciting enough for me. I can choose looping options for it. I don't want the movie to loop. It's a rather lengthy movie, why would it loop. But there I'm done with it. Next up, I'm just going to insert another page break to this content appears over there. And I'll show you how to configure an audio widget. So here we have a little audio snippet from, I believe, the mission control commander for the Viking missions. He's very excited about observing the first image from Mars ever which this is. Actually, it's pretty amazing.

- How do you possibly describe the first photograph that a human being has ever seen from the surface of another planet?
- I would say it's kind of contrasty and maybe, framing's not great, but whatever. I mean, you know, at least proud of, you should be. So that the way that you define what the audio is going to represent itself as on the page is, again, in the Widget tab, I can choose to make that scrubber if I want, but it's better left a button. I can also make it an image. If I wanted this whole surface to be a tappable thing that would play that audio clip as Patrick has it, I could just say, make it an image and then delete that image.

And now we have a clickable thing that will play that audio clip when the user-- well, I'll deal with that-- selects it on the page. So not a beautiful layout there but you kind of get the idea and also that I'm trying to move very quickly through this.

Galleries-- Galleries are fun. They're probably one of the best ways to make your content more interactive as evidence by the Feynman book which is basically just a bunch of audio clips and images. You know, that's all it takes to make the experience truly engaging. And in case of the Feynman book, Caltech just had all the stuff in the archives resurrected and give it kind of new life by combining it with, you know, Feynman's magnum opus of Six Easy Pieces. And it's pretty amazing what it does, just through the use of simple and basic media type.

For the gallery, you can go to the pedantic route of adding the gallery and dragging the images in or you're just drag in the folder and, boom, you've got gallery. It was a folder of images if you had a folder of Word documents you wouldn't have been happy.

But you can see as I'm resizing that gallery and making it fill the page, that the imagery is doing the right thing. So we're always kind of maximizing the content within the available space within that canvass space. If I need to reorient or reposition something on a kind of a per image basis, I can. But I'm pretty happy with the way that looks. So I'm going to leave it there.

3D content, we support 3D that is rendered out using a kind of standard file format known as Collada, it's an interchange format. It doesn't do a lot. But it does allow all of your-- all of the conventional 3D authoring tools to export models that you can use here in iBooks Author.

This one doesn't have a great background for it, let's start white. It's not going to work for us, I'm going to quickly make that black and it's good. One thing I have to show you before we wrap up this interactive image. So let me just create one here. I'm not going to go to the other section to do that.

Now, the interactive image is one of our most favorite widgets. It's the one that allows you to kind of create these very-- it's a very engaging experience just around photos. And what you do is you set up callouts to identify features within the photos. So I've just inserted the interactive image. I'm going to drag over an image.

There it is, all of the lunar exploration rovers are there. The little one kind of looks like the Tech Droid from Star Wars. Am I allowed to say that? I'm probably not allowed to say that. I said it. In order to define a kind of special region within this image, I can select the callout. This is already got kind of a zoom set up for it. But I'm going to bring this callout down here.

At least [inaudible], kind of zoom in a little bit. And now we've set a view for the Sojourner. So we can go from our default view to that view. So we've got a nice interpolation. In the interest of time, however, I'm not going to set up all of these callouts. Let's just do two.

Zooming a little bit, set the view, and now we're done. We've set up our interactive image. So two things very quickly, pop-over widget. The pop-over widget is a great way to supply that secondary information when you want the user to kind of guess what the contents maybe or be surprised when the contents are revealed. To create it, I insert one. I drag over an image that I want to use. Actually, I don't want that one, I want Sojourner.

I drag over the image that I want to serve as kind of the tap target, the thing that the users going to interact with to pop the pop-over. I can double-click it. There's my pop-over. To populate it, I mean, just drag in text, drag another image element, position it where I want it.

Sort of kind of-- sort of kind of-- there we go. Boy, it's really twitchy. There you go. And there we have it. And then finally I'm going to add a Keynote which I was hoping to be able to show you how to build yourself right now, but we won't be able to do that. After a moment of processing that file, keynote is actually being prompted in the background to create a lightweight version of the presentation.

In order to make this look a little bit better on the page, I'm going to use another great feature for reducing content, a footprint on your pages and that is Show Widget As Thumbnail. And when you click Show Widget As Thumbnail, that experience will be represented by a proxy element that you're going to tap on before the user goes to full-screen. And I'm going to customize that tap element just by dragging in an image that I want to service my proxy and then I'm pretty much done.

Now two more things before we go. When I get to this point, I want to understand how this-- how this-- what the end user experience is going to be. So I'm going to need to preview it. In version 1, we were able to preview with an attached iPad. I'm going to show you something that nobody knows yet. And I'm not going to claim that we're going to ship it anytime soon. But I have a special build of iBooks Author here that will allow me to preview to iBooks for the Mac directly.

So here I can click Preview, iBooks Author kindly reminds me that I can't see portrait flow mode within iBooks for Mac. But once it builds its preview, we should see our book. So here's the Keynote widget that I was going to show you how to create, but didn't.

Our pop-over widget with a bit of blown layout there, our interactive image, and so on, you get it. So all of the elements are here and previewable within iBooks. Again, I can't say when we're going to ship this. But we absolutely will. Now when it comes time to finally-- to shift your book to the iBooks store, you can do that directly within iBooks Author. So I have another file here I'm going to open up.

I mentioned that iBooks Author works in kind of multiuser contexts. So what you do in that case is you have someone build the chapter. And you're like, "Great, you got your chapter." I'm like, "Yeah, I do." You go, "OK, you copy that chapter." And then you simply paste it where you need it.

So now we've introduced that new chapter. It's not in the right place. I'm going to drag it here. You'll notice that the whole time that we're composing this, this thing was reporting that it was Chapter 1, which in fact it was for this particular document. But when we've introduced it into our new document because we're using those things, the section numbering fields, the section titling field, this thing is now properly numbered, Chapter 3. And everything works within the table of contents view as well. When you publish, you hit the Publish button, iBooks Author does one thing first, it validates your book and make sure that you're not going to run into any errors with the publishing.

Do you ever try to type in a room with hundreds of people looking at you? It's not easy. It's going to ask you, "Is this a new book or is this an update to a previously published book?" It is absolutely an update. Version 1 is up there on the store.

Here, all I have to do is add a new value, increment that value. It's worth noting that you always have to increment that value, you can't go down. Once you go up and when it hits the bookstore at a current number, you're stuck with that number or above it.

Another beautiful thing we've done, sample books, you don't need to create one on your own. All you have to do is pick a chapter from your book that you want to be the basis of the sample. And we'll generate the sample that is 15 pages or 20 percent of that chapter, whichever comes first.

Then you export your book. So close, there we go. Little ding notifies me that my book is exported. I'm now ready to go to iTunes producer to finalize and ship this to the iBooks store, again, all from within iBooks Author. So that's it for the session. A few points I want to leave you with before I get cut-off.

So as we've shown it's now, easier than ever to create this kind of really interesting content. The coding isn't required. But if you want to bring it, you can and it's going to be very effective. Got great new widgets that allow you to extend the interactive experience and make stuff that is unique out there.

So you can publish and make the updates to your books, push new versions of your books to the iBooks store. Your end users are going to get notified directly within iBooks that new versions are available. So you can continue to give them updated experience to troubleshoot, extend the content, add value overtime, it's all up to you. And with all these things, we think it's possible for anyone to become a published author. That's it for the session. Thank you so much for joining us today.
