---
Title:  Leveraging Web Content in Mac OS X Applications with WebKit
Year:   2009
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2009/200/

[!] This transcript has potential transcription errors.
---

 Michael: Good morning. My name's Michael Lopp and it's a pleasure to be back here at WWDC talking with you about leveraging web content in Max OS X applications with WebKit. As I said, my name's Michael Lopp, I run the online store. And this is what the online store looks like, in case you haven't had a chance to see it. This is web content and let's go ahead and leverage it. There; what we're going to do here, the story, the story behind this presentation starts with Sting, if you can believe it or not.

This is a feature that's in GarageBand that we announced in MacWorld called Artist Lessons. And last summer we came, GarageBand team came to us and they said, hey we want to do this feature called Artist Lessons. And what it was, if you guys don't know is, this is an amazing feature inside of GarageBand where Sting and other artists actually teach you how to play these songs. And it's beautiful high, high production quality, gorgeous applications.

Now Online Store Music Lessons, what's going on here? What they wanted to do, they have some very successful requirements, they wanted, these files are really big. They're like half a gig to a gig and a half in size. And that means they weren't going to get them all on the High Life DVD. The other thing is they want to charge for them, obviously. And the other thing was they were going to constantly have new ones.

The fourth thing was what they wanted to do is they actually wanted to embed the experience of merchandising and browsing inside of the application. They wanted to not have it be a jarring jump into another application experience. And so that's what we did for them. This is the Lesson Store. And this is the media browser inside of GarageBand.

And if we've done our job well, you will not know that everything over there on the right, everything in the black box is the same thing as you were seeing on that first slide that I told you, showed you, the white page. That's the store. We embedded it. We did some amazing things with WebKit, and we did some amazing technology that we guys want to talk about today. The nice thing about this is you stay inside of GarageBand the entire time.

You're purchasing, you're downloading, everything happens inside of GarageBand It's a really beautiful user experience. And the reason, what we're going to talk about today is actually what we learned as part of this process of embedding this store inside of it. What's happening that's really cool is that platforms are merging. On one side you've got Cocoa; on the other side you've got the Web.

And what we're able to do, thanks to a lot of technologies that we're, Apple's producing, is you can start to pick and choose the respective parts to build something new. The GarageBand browser is Cocoa, it's gorgeous, it's beautiful, and it's the store all working together. And again, you probably will never notice when you're coming, or when you're leaving, or coming inside of it.
