---
Title:  What's New for Podcast Producer 2
Year:   2009
Web:    https://nonstrict.eu/wwdcindex/wwdc2009/613/

[!] This transcript has potential transcription errors.
---

 Thanks.

[ Applause ]

My name is Kjell Bronder. I'm an engineer on the Podcast Producer team. And I'm going to be presenting today with my colleague Eric Circlaeys. And we're here to really take a look at all of the great new features that we have in Podcast Producer in Snow Leopard.

To start off though we're going to recap and look at why podcasting is such a powerful tool. But also address some of the challenges that come with creating a lot of content and being able to scale and produce a lot of content on a very regular basis. And the whole goal here is to show you how Podcast Producer not only allows you to create really rich and cool content, but also allows you to scale and publish tens or hundreds of Podcasts every week. And all of this is just really to set the stage so we can show you all of the great new features that we have for you. And I'm sure that's why most of you are actually here today.

So let's get started. So podcasting, how many of you here consume Podcasts on a regular basis? OK, that's a lot of people and that makes my job easier because I don't have to explain to you what podcasting really is. But there is something I want to spend a few minutes talking about and that's why podcasting is such a powerful tool.

And I think these three words really recap it really well. It's whatever, wherever, whenever. Whatever, there are so many topics covered by Podcasts out there. If there's a topic that you are interested in, I'm sure you can find a Podcast that covers it. Just look at the Podcast directory on the iTunes store or on iTunes U.

The wealth of information there is unbelievable. And wherever, this comes to the mobility of podcasting. It's got mobility built right into its name. I can take my Podcaster wherever I want. I listen to my MRP Podcast on my way to work and I watch my Ted Talks on the treadmill at the gym. But wherever is not just bringing my content wherever I want to go, it's getting from all around the world.

My Podcasts come from all over the US, from Canada, from France, from England. And I don't even know where half of my Podcasts actually even come from. And whenever, this is the whole idea of time shifting. I get to choose when I want to listen to the content I'm interested in.

And this is really the WWW of media. So how many of you are involved in way or another in actually producing podcasts today? Cool, so that's quite a few of you. So I'm sure you're already aware that there's a whole wealth of tools out there to create really good content.

And Apple ships some of the best and easiest tools to create all these videos or audio content. But the challenge comes when you want to create a lot of content and you have to do this on a very regular basis. This creating the content then becomes a very labor-intensive process.

And it requires a lot of resources. Also, in certain organizations, you probably have certain individuals who are experts in their field and you want to distribute their knowledge. These experts might not be experts in video editing or might just not have the time to spend to create the content. So one of your challenges is to make it as easy as possible for them to capture the content they want to deliver.

But it's not just creating the content, you also have to publish this content. And there are tons of different ways of getting your content out into the world. And there seems to be every other week that there's a new web technology that appears for getting your content out there. And the same thing with creating your content.

This can be a very labor intensive and manual process. So we really need a way if you're going to be creating a lot of podcasts on a very regular basis, a way of automating this. And that's for the customers who are creating the content, but what about your audience? Well your audience already has their ways. They already consume their content and are used to consuming it in a particular way. So to make your podcasts as popular as possible, you really want to make it as easy as possible for your audience to consume that content.

And really just fit into or onto the devices that they're used to using. And that's where Podcast Producer comes into play. Podcast Producer makes it really, really easy to capture your content that you want to produce. But it also automates all of these manual tasks and labor-intensive tasks that we've been talking about.

And the goal here is that first for the person who's creating the content and they're capturing their content, it's just a few clicks. But also for you the administrators, everything is automated. So once you set up the system, all you get to do is just watch the blinking lights on the beautiful excerpts.

So let's take a look at Podcast Producer. Podcast Producer is a full end-to-end solution. It provides a real easy way of capturing content. It can be video, it can be a screen capture, come from other applications. This content is then automated, is processed in an automated fashion on your servers. Once the content has been processed, we deliver it to your audience.

But another key point of Podcast Producer is a fully scalable solution. So you can scale Podcast Producer to publish tens or hundreds of podcasts every week. But I'm going to bring up Eric on stage real quick and he's going to show you how easy we've made it for the end users to capture the content and how easy it is for your audience to consume it. So Eric.

 Thank you Kjell.

[ Applause ]

Good afternoon everyone.

[ Applause ]

We have a lot of things to demonstrate to you this week. And as a first demonstration, I would like to show you how easy it is to create a podcast with Podcast Producer. And for that I'm going to recall a short video that Podcast Capture, which is the front side of the Podcast Producer.

Let's move to the demo machine.

[ Background noise ]

OK? So this is Podcast Capture. I'm going to use one of the podcasting types we provide by default. A very simple one, the single video source to begin. And I'm going to use the iSight video, oh look at my hair. OK, so Kjell you should have told me that.

That is a very short video to demonstrate how easy it is.

[ Background noise ]

Welcome to Apple World Wide Developer Conference 2009. My name is Eric Circlaeys and this is my very first podcast made on a Mac with Podcast Producer on Snow Leopard. I've just clicked the stop button, I'm done, I have nothing to record anymore. Let's publish this to the system.

And let's put an official title for this. And a description, let's say belated format. Then I press submit. Once I press submit, there is no next step. I am done. Podcast Producer takes care of about everything else for me automatically. And the content is going to be ready really quickly, in a few seconds.

Thing is, thanks to Atom and RSS, we're going to be notified automatically when the content gets ready, which means any user that subscribe to my feeds are going to receive that notification in Safari or iTunes and then will be able to consume that right away. To come back to the invisible bridge that Kjell addressed earlier, both the user that shares the content, that shares the knowledge and the user that consumes it both have nothing to deal with in between. Podcast Producer does the rest automatically for them magically. That's the whole point about Podcast Producer.

To bring the technology to the user seamlessly and to make podcasting very easy. OK, let's imagine you're an expert on a specific domain and you are delivering a lot of lectures every week. Well, you don't have the time to think about what remarking your content, you don't really want to know how to add an introduction movie. You don't want to care about all these different formats you have to generate for all those different devices out there.

And you don't have to care about all these destinations. Your role is to actually deliver the content, deliver the knowledge. And Podcast Producer made that super easy. So notice I have just received an iChat which tells me as submitter that the contents, that the content is available. And let me show you this content through iTunes. And I will dig into this later in the presentation. So, let's click here. And let's watch the result.

[ Period of silence ]

[ Music ]

The content has been branded automatically for me with a nice introduction video, my company video. Then we generate an introduce, we generated a titling automatically with metadata submitted with Podcast Capture. And finally, the content itself with a watermark. And at the end, the exit video was added.

Thank you very much, back to Kjell.

[ Applause ]

 OK. Eric, you put me back on slide.

 Sure.

 Slides. Thank you. So you've seen how easy it is. So Podcast Producer is three main pieces. It's a real solution that makes it really easy to capture, process and deliver your content.

And we're going to dive into these three pieces and really look what's happening underneath here. The first piece is the capture piece. We have a great application called Podcast Capture which ships on all Mac OS X clients in your utilities folder. Makes it really easy to capture video and audio recordings. So you can use like what Eric just did, your built in iSight. But we also have support for remote camera. So your typical use case for example is a DV camera hooked up to a Mac mini at the back of a lecture hall.

So what, basically what would happen in that case is let's say your professor would walk into the lecture hall, walk up to the lectern machine, choose the room they're in and just press start. The camera at the back of the room that's been set up by your AV staff will just automatically start.

When they're done giving the lecture, all the professor has to do is press stop and the content will be submitted and published to the Podcast Producer server who will take care of the rest. But Podcast Capture also lets you do screen capture. So you can capture the screen if you're doing a presentation for example with Keynote.

This is really powerful. But maybe you are really proficient with all of the capture tools that we talked about earlier or the content or the video production tools that we talked about. But you just don't want to worry about encoding your video to all these different formats and publishing it out via all these different ways of publishing your content. Well Podcast Producer can take care of that last mile for you as well using the file submission in Podcast Capture.

You can just take your produced video and upload it to Podcast Producer and let it take care of the rest. But where this is really powerful is Podcast Capture just sits on top of the command line tool, Podcast. So you can just man Podcast today on your machines and you'll see we have a whole suite of tools that let you control cameras and submit content.

And what this does is it gives you the possibility to create your own custom frontend if you have a particular need in your organization. And if you were at yesterday's session for the server state of the union, you saw this is what they've done at New York University for example with a custom webpage. So that's for the capture piece. Let's talk about the processing.

Podcast Producer is a full server process. And it manages several resources such as cameras and workflows. We're going to talk a bit more about workflows are, but you can think of them as the podcasting recipe. It works with other server technologies like Xgrid and it enforces all of the access controls.

And it's administered right in Server Admin. And we leverage a lot of the underlying services that every, that you're used to seeing on Mac OS X server. Like Open Directory for Authentication, the web server for distributing your content and other servers. But one, one service that we really leverage a lot is Xgrid. Xgrid is Apple's grid technology. It's what allows us to process podcasts in parallel. So let's go back to our university use case.

And let's say I've got 10 lecture rooms that I want to capture from. And starting at 9:00 AM and they capture until 10:00 AM. Well at 10:00 AM, I've got 10 videos that are being uploaded to my Podcast Producer server. By leveraging Xgrid, we can then process all of this content in parallel if you have enough Xgrid agents. But let's say next semester, well you want to move to 20 rooms to capture content. Well you can achieve the scalability very easily with Xgrid.

By just adding some more Xgrid agents, your system is now capable of processing the same amount of, the same amount, all this extra content, sorry, in the same amount of time. And we also leverage Xsan, which is a growable file system. So once you start growing and producing more and more podcasts, you can just grow your file system.

So I mentioned workflows. Workflows are the DNA of the Podcast Producer system. They're the recipe. They tell the server what to do with the content. They define the processing that's going to happen to the video and how you're going to publish all your content. But where this is really powerful is underneath they're just Xgrid jobs. And Xgrid has the capacity of running any command line tool or UNIX command. So if you can write a command line tool to do a specific thing that you need your workflow to do, you can integrate it with your Podcast Producer workflow.

And this means that Podcast Producer workflows are fully customizable. But we didn't stop there. We created a full suite of command line tools to make it really easy to do some of the tasks that we expect a lot of you are going to want to do. And who better than Apple to write the command line tools that are going to leverage all the Apple technology that's there already to do it? So we have command line tools to do video editing, encoding, publishing and all different kinds of tasks that you're going to need in your workflows.

And we leverage tons of different technologies. We go from leveraging Quartz Composer and QuickTime for video editing to Kerberos to Xgrid, we even use Ruby. I mean you use a lot of different technologies. And there's a wonderful talk at 10:30 on Friday that's really going to go in and talk about all of these technologies and show you how we use them.

So I encourage you to go see that. The final piece of Podcast Producer is the delivery. We take care of publishing and notifying your users when your content has been processed. And we also make it so it's very easy for your audience to consume it. And we make sure that it just fits and it works on their iPhones, their iPods or their Apple TVs. And that they can access this content through the applications that they're used to using. So that's Podcast Producer in a nutshell. It's a great solution for capturing, processing and delivering your content.

And it's already been a great success. We started shipping in Leopard. And it's been of course a great success in higher education which is just this natural fit. But we also have K to 12 customers that are doing some really cool things. Like we have students who submit content to Podcast Producer and Podcast Producer creates feeds and podcasts for the parents so the parents can see what their children have been doing at school.

And of course in business there are tons of different applications, like employee training is one that comes out right away. But maybe you're in a company that has a distribution channel all around the world. What better way than podcasting to inform all your distributors about your new product?

And one point that I really want to drive home is the scalability of the solution. You can start, you can set up Podcast Producer on an all-in-one server and have a great solution. And once you start producing a lot more podcasts, you can start growing. And you can grow all the way up to a full data center.

Just for podcasting. OK, so now everybody is up to speed on what Podcast Producer is. And this is where we're going to have some fun and we're going to talk about all the great new features we've got in store for you. And there are a lot of them.

Right off the bat, I get to talk about my favorite one, which is Dual Source. And this is kind of you know in Leopard it was great. You could, you could capture your screen capture, you could capture your screen and you could do video recording. But we wanted to go even further.

Why not have both and make it your video even more appealing? So in Snow Leopard we have Dual Source which allows you to capture any two video sources. So these can be local cameras, these can be remote cameras, these can be at your local screen. You can capture everything you want.

And this is really ideal for lectures or presentations because you can capture your Keynote and have your talking head underneath and show up. And we've built some custom, we've built a lot of different layouts for you that you'll be able to choose from. And these are all based on Quartz Composer. So that means if you want to develop your own Quartz Composer layout, you can do that.

And so this is a great third party integration point as well. So we had Dual Source working and it was great. But you know it just kind of sat there. And we wanted to do something a bit more. And we started looking at it, and we're like we've got all this information, we've got the slides from the presentation that we just recorded and we've got the head.

So what we decided to do is well, you know when you've got the slides, that's really what you want to concentrate until you've had time to read through them. And then you know seeing the talking head is great because it you know provides branding for the content and everything. So what we do is we do an image analysis. And we look at your primary input and we detect when it's been stable for a certain amount of time and once your readers have had time to read through the slides, we can then trigger a transition.

So for example, we can push back the slides and swing in the presenters head for example. Or maybe just have the presenter's head appear or even just switch. And we have different ways of doing this. And since we're already doing this image analysis, we can detect when the slides change, so why not insert chapter markers. So we do that automatically for you. And this is all done completely automatically. So that means your presenter doesn't have to worry about a thing. Everything gets done on the server. And this is what the UI looks like. Eric's going to demo this in a few minutes.

I think we've really got a great Dual Source story for you. Podcast Composer. So I talked about workflows and I talked about how powerful the Podcast Producer workflows were in Leopard. You could really customize them, you could put in your own command line tools. If you wanted to do PDF color separation, you could do that.

But with anything that's powerful, there was some complexity behind it. And it was sometimes a bit of a challenge because you have to deal with these bundle formats that incorporated XML and you basically had to break open a text editor to customize them. And we really want as many people out there creating workflows as possible. So we've created this beautiful application which is Podcast Composer which really makes it fun and intuitive to create workflows with.

And this Podcast Composer is a great application and it lets you create workflows for three different types that we have in Snow Leopard. We have the single source workflows which are like what we had in Leopard where you can capture either your video or your screen capture. It supports Dual Source and here's where you can set if you want the automatic transitions or chaptering or not.

But we also have this other great feature which is Montage. Montage let's you submit an array of documents to the Podcast Producer system, leveraging Quick Look technology it will create slide show out of these documents and generate a movie. And I think we're going to see some really cool uses of this. But we also wanted to make it really easy for you to set up the video editing and branding of and then make it easy for you to brand your own podcasts.

And for every podcast that goes through your workflow, it receives the same branding. And also with Podcast Composer you can deploy your workflow straight from the application. Workflow management is built right into the application for you. And this makes it really easy to get your workflows out onto your servers. And here's a screenshot.

And Eric's also going to demo this in a few minutes. In Leopard, we took care of publishing the content for you. We knew how to publish to many different destinations. We could publish to the blog server, to iTunes U, to tons of other different destinations. But we realized why not host the content? We have all the metadata. We have all the main content. Why not host it for us? And why not create a content centralized repository to host all this content?

So this is what we've done with a Podcast Library. You know have the possibility in Snow Leopard for the Podcast Producer system to host your content and serve it up. And we're using industry standards that are Atom and RSS to serve up your content. And we're not just serving up in any old boring way. We've created this notion of what we call Smart Feeds.

And think of this as like Smart Folders that you're used in the finder, just served up over the web. So you get to specify a query and all of the content that replies to that query will then be served up in this feed. So let's say you want to create a user feed. So basically all the content that a user has ever submitted will show up in that user's feed.

So all of your content will be, will show up in your podcast library and we'll be serving it up via Atom and RSS. Another point that's really important here is this simplifies integration with exterior services. We're publishing everything over Atom and RSS. So if your exterior service knows how to ingest Atom or RSS, you can just pull the content straight from the podcast library and you no longer have to write a custom call to push out to your servers or to your service. Also one of the reasons we're using Atom and we're really pushing Atom is it allows you to have multiple enclosures for an episode.

So with RSS for example, if you're going to publish an iPod video in audio only and then an Apple TV version, you have to maintain three different feeds for each podcast. Well, now with Atom you don't have to do that anymore. You can have one single feed that has every, has all three enclosures inside of that episode. So I'm going to bring Eric back up on stage and he's going to demo these three new features.

 Thank you Kjell. Now the fun begins. There is this nice cool feature in Podcast Capture I really like as well which is the Dual Source recording and I like to demonstrate that to you. So let's move to the demo machine. I'm going to record myself delivering a really quick Keynote presentation on Paris. And then we'll discuss about what's happening behind right after. So, here's my Keynote presentation in Podcast Capture.

So let me connect. And I'm going to use one other, one other podcasting type, the Dual Source one. You have then two previews, one from the screen and one from the iSight, could be also remote camera if you have one concealed somewhere. And I'm going to run the recording.

And run the slides. Welcome to this year's issue of the essence of the monument. Today we're going to talk about one of the most famous cathedrals in the world, Notre Dame de Paris. Notre Dame took over 200 years to be built. With its flying buttresses, gargoyles and roses windows, Notre Dame is considered to be one of the finest French gothic architecture monument.

I hope you enjoy the session and see you next time. So I've just stopped the recording using a short cut. The default one is actually Command F2. You can set up that in Podcast Capture, that's really useful. And I'm going to publish that the same way as before.

Oh in a minute here I do have access to the workflow picker and my previous demonstration since I had only one workflow for the user that was connected. Actually all that was automatically set up for him. In that case, I have access to multiple workflows so I do have to pick the current one associated to the speech I've just run through.

So let's put a nice title here then a good description. And let's submit that to Podcast Producer. OK. While this is processing, I would like to talk to you about the, what's happening behind the scenes. As Kjell explained, once you press submit Podcast Capture is going to send all the metafiles and all the metadata files to Podcast Producer and Podcast Producer is going to trigger the workflow associated to your information.

Workflows are really the heart of Podcast Producer. This is what is going to drive all the different actions on your metafiles. And I'd like to show you this workflow right now, one new to you which is Podcast Composer. So Podcast Composer is there to provide in Podcast Producer 2 to easily create and deploy workflows.

It's, it really simplifies all your work with seven stages. These stages and this flow is really the, is all the workflow you have to care about. It's the information, the import, edit, export, then publish, notify and summary. And we're going to dig into the details of each of these.

So let's start with the information. This page is really straightforward. This is where you're going to put all the information needed to tell this workflow has a nice title and has a description. These are going to show up in Podcast Capture for example when the user needs to pick one workflow. The next stage is really the first active stage.

This is where you're going to define what this workflow is going to be used for. There are three possible choices. You could use this workflow for its single source recording. This is the old case scenario where you could submit a screen capture or a local video recording or even an audio recording. Then you have Dual Source. This importer is going to take the two sources that you have generated with Podcast Capture, the screen capture as well as talking head video.

And this, this one is going to generate for you a single video file, a picture in picture video file for the rest of the workflow. Then you have the Montage feature. The Montage importer is creating for you video out of all the documents you may have submitted to Podcast Capture. So this could be PDF documents that could be images, pages document, Keynotes presentation. And that leverages Quick Look technology to extract images of all these documents.

And then with Quartz Compositions we're going to build a slideshow of this. Then it's time to brand your content. In that particular stage you will be able to set a particular introduction movie, the one from your company to set the layout of your podcast title. Then maybe you like to set a watermark or another title for the content you have submitted and finally the actual video.

I don't want to go too much into detail since we're going to bring, tell you more about this tomorrow in the Podcast Composer session, but nevertheless I'd like to show you how easy it is just by drag and dropping content, how you can brand very easily your workflow. So I have this nice introduction video here.

[ Music ]

And if I want to set my workflow with this introduction video, guess what.

That's just as easy as drag and dropping this content here. Then for my watermark, this is exactly the same. I just drag and drop this content here and then the content will be automatically watermarked. Maybe I like to go into the details of that and put the watermark on the left. Change the size of the watermark and change the opacity. And when I'm done, I click done and that's it.

I've branded my company.

[ Applause ]

Thank you.

[ Applause ]

Once you are OK about this look and feel, it's time to decide what are going to be the formats you'd like to publish. Well, mostly formats are tightly coupled with devices out there. So we provide valuable, easy encoding settings for you for the iPod iPhone, for Apple TV, for the audio only devices and cellular.

But if you want to go deeper and actually tune and create your own encoding settings for some reasons, well if you have Compressor installed on this machine, then Podcast Composer will be able to see it and will allow you to pick one of the settings you've already configured with Compressor.

Which give you almost no limit for inputting settings. So once you're OK with all these formats, it's time to decide where you're going to publish all that content. By default, we are leveraging Podcast Library, which is a new way of publishing of the content to a single point. And then distributing using standardized technology.

But maybe you'd like to use different ways and still publish your content directly to the Wiki or maybe archive the content using File Transfer Protocol. Maybe you may have Final Cut Server installed somewhere, you'd like to leverage that. Or you'd like to archive it to some other shelf file system you have.

It's even possible to call another workflow and maybe you wrote something very small by yourself and you'd like to chain that with this workflow you've just created with Podcast Composer. Then it's time to notify some people that the content has been published and it's also maybe time to notify some services that the content is available and can be now synchronized with your service. That's the case with iTunes U or maybe the iTunes podcast processor.

And for the user, you could send an email, but kind of really like this new one which is an iChat message. And finally this is a summary of this workflow. Well, it's really a stretch forward. I'm doing a Dual Source, encoding to three different formats, publishing my content to the library and sending an iChat message to some people and I just received one iChat message as you see. Then you can save this workflow locally and work on that later.

Or you can deploy it right away on the server. Now this is Podcast Producer and this is your workflow. Let me close this. Before showing you the result on iTunes like I did before, I'd like to talk to you a bit more about the library. And for that I'm going to open the same field as was previously when Kjell that opened with Producer but using the Atom feed instead. And that's going to show up in Safari.

So this is the essence of the monument feed. And this is an Atom feed. And as you can see, the cool thing of that is we have the ability now to put multiple attachments per episode. And in the case of the one I just recording, I have the iPod iPhone version, the Apple TV version and the audio version available right away in this specific episode.

And again all that is standardized technology which means anyone that could actually read XML and ingest XML could benefit from that and build some nice UI right on top, on top of all that. The library is creating feeds and is managing all the feeds for you automatically. At the top level of the library, you do have plenty of feeds created for you automatically. There is, there are these feeds per user that are submitting content.

But we also have feeds per workflows. For instance I do have access to all the content I have submitted so far. Same for Kjell for example. It's as easy as that. So let's move back to iTunes to look at the results. Let's refresh.

[ Music ]

Same as before.

[ Music ]

It's nicely branded.

[ Period of silence ]

And then it, this is the Dual Source. As Kjell explained, we've introduced two additional feature. The first one is the automatic transition. So when we detect for a certain amount of time that there is no more animation in the slides, then it's time to trigger a nice animation.

So this is what's happening here automatically for you. The nice thing about that is well since we are capable of detecting those animations, well it's also possible to actually add different chapters. So then you can start at some point in your presentation automatically. And again, all that has been done for you by Podcast Producer as you may have seen in Podcast Capture, I just clicked record and stop. No one is even here actually. So back to Kjell, thank you.

[ Applause ]

 Thank you Eric.

[ Period of silence ]

So we just talked about the Podcast Library, you just got to see the Podcast Library in the demo that Eric just showed you. And we've, we just also mentioned that it's a really great solution for integrating with other services. So we've worked really hard and we've worked really tightly with the iTunes U team to make the integration with iTunes U as simple as possible. And we now have this one click setup.

So for those of you who are used to setting iTunes pages, now all you have to do when you create a course page is point iTunes U at your podcast library feed and it will automatically generate the full course page for you. This means it's going to grab the title, the description, even the logo image from the feed and all of the content that's ever been published to that feed. And automatically populate your new course feed, your course page. So you no longer have to go in and manually upload all of the different content.

[ Applause ]

And this also means that whenever new content is going to land at your Podcast Library, we'll now notify iTunes U which will pick it up automatically. I think this really is going to make Podcast Library the easiest way to host your content and getting your content to iTunes U.

And as podcasting becomes even more and more popular and it's almost becoming a service, a business critical service, so in Snow Leopard we now have high availability. This means that both the Podcast Producer server and the Xgrid controller have automatical fail over. So this means if someone trips over one of the power cables in your server room, your end users will not even see it. It will be completely transparent to them. The whole solution will continue working because your other Podcast Producer nodes will pick up the load.

[ Period of silence ]

We also realize that a lot of you out there who are creating podcasts have invested previously into other Pro Video applications and maybe even continue investing in these applications. But you want it to tie in and leverage these investments which is capital but also you've had to learn these tools.

So now in Snow Leopard, we've got really great integration with these tools. As you already saw in Eric's demo, you can now leverage Compressor straight from Podcast Composer. This means that you can leverage any of their predefined custom encoding settings or you can even create your own with Podcast, with Compressor, sorry. And for those who don't know, Qmaster is Compressor's grid technology that allows you to do segmented encoding.

So if you already have a Qmaster grid that you want to leverage, that's now possible with Podcast Producer in Snow Leopard. Podcast Producer knows how to talk to the Qmaster, submit your content to Qmaster, let it encode your content and then it'll come back to Podcast Producer where it can finish processing and be published. We also now know how to publish to Final Cut Server in case you're using that in your environment.

And as you saw in Eric's demo, it's so easy to add you know a custom Compressor setting. You just click plus, Compressor and there you go, it's going to use Compressor. The web application. Now in Snow Leopard, we will be, we will be shipping and by default you'll have a web application for Podcast Capture.

[ Applause ]

This means from all modern web browsers, you'll be able to access Podcast Producer and submit content to it. This makes Podcast Producer completely accessible from Mac OS X, from mobile devices, especially like the iPhone, from Windows and any other platform out there that is web savvy. And this is what it looks like. It looks right straight like the Podcast Capture.

You can do video. And even the new features like Dual Source are integrated straight into the web application. And now you've seen all of these cool features. And I'm sure all you want to do is run back to your hotel and set up Podcast Producer and start playing with it.

Well, even that we've made super easy. I don't know how many times per week I have to set up a Podcast Producer system just to test. And you know I'll admit I might be a bit lazy. So now we've made it that just in four clicks and I have to type my password twice, I'll set up Podcast Producer.

And we'll set, they've got two different types of setup. We have the express setup which is the fore fix I've just talked about that will set up an all-in-one system. There's also the standard setup mode which makes it really easy to integrate Podcast Producer into your existing environment.

So if you already have particular services like Open Directory or Xgrid or already a shared file system, we can now leverage those. And this is once you've set it up, you'll have a great launch page. It'll bring you straight to Podcast Capture or to the library or jump you straight into Podcast Composer so you can start creating your first workflow and having fun with that application. So here I'm going to bring Eric back up on stage and he's going to show you how easy it is to set up Podcast Producer.

 All you have seen so far are really exciting new features in Podcast Producer. There is one I like to share with you and that's the how easy it is to set up a Podcast Producer 2. So let's move to a freshly installed machine and let's do together an install of Podcast Producer all-in-one. OK. So I've just installed Snow Leopard Server from the DVD you got yesterday.

And in the server assistant the brand new Server assistant, I've just entered a private IP address, click next, next, next, next. And at the end automatically it configured for me the DNS server. The networking environment and here it is. So nothing more. And from there I'd like to set up Podcast Producer all-in-one. So I've selected my service, my server. I'm going to go to the settings.

In the services I'm going to say I'd like to set up Podcast Producer on this machine. I'm going to click on that service and in the offer view tab, there is the button here which says configure Podcast Producer. This is the magic button. So you click on this one and here is the Podcast Producer setup assistant. So from there we're going to count together how many clicks I'm going to do, alright? So this is really straightforward, this is just hello from the assistant.

So one, thank you. Here well I'd like to do an express setup. That's what I want, so that's the setup I recommend too, an all-in-one on one machine. So I'm going to click and that's going to be perfect. Here I need to set what is going to be the administrator for all my podcasting environments.

So let's say it's going to me.

[ Period of silence ]

I enter a really complicated password.

[ Period of silence ]

Three.

[ Laughter ]

OK. And well I'm done, this is the summary of what the setup assistant is going to do for us and the last click is actually doing the work for us. So while it's actually doing all the stuff let's discuss about what's happening in the background.

So first it's going to set up an Open Directory master for you. Then it's going to create the associated accounts needed for Podcast Producer. Then you're going to make an Xgrid controller. So it's going to set up an Xgrid controller for you. You also need an Xgrid agent to run the jobs and tasks. So we're going to set up the agent for you.

Then the NFS because maybe you'd like to expand this all-in-one to two or three servers. Once this is done, it's time to set up Podcast Producer service. So, in that particular case, we need to install the library. We need to configure the default feeds. We need to install the default workflows. And we need to make sure that Podcast Producer uses Xgrid and uses Open Directory.

And when all this is done, it's time to start all the services in the right order and this is what's actually happening right now. So I don't know if you remember how easy it was if you want to set up a Podcast Producer. I'm pretty sure you'll like this interface.

So here it is.

[ Applause ]

But I'd like to show you it's not fake. So I'd like to do a recording and then show you all that is working with all the different features we've talked previously. So for that I'm going to run a manual submission but instead of using Podcast Capture on the deck that you all know, I'd like to show you the web application.

So let's connect to the web application.

[ Period of silence ]

Let's use my Eric credential and boom I'm on the web application. This works on any modern web browser and the cool thing is it looks totally similar to the experience you have on the next step. So you can do a single source recording, Dual Source recording, audio recording, all that with remote cameras.

And you can do manual file submission. We talked earlier about Montage. I'd like to address that now. I think it should be cool to do single source recording. It's cool to record those streams, cool to record the iSight and do some stuff. It's even better when it comes to Dual Source because you seen the demo of Dual Source at the same time I'm recording the stream and talking heads, it's nice. But I do have these slides, I do have these documents, I do have all these images that I'd like to show you from my Origin site as well.

And that's why we designed Montage for. So if you have some content you'd like to share, it's time then to submit your content via the file submission and select the Montage workflow. And the Montage workflow is going to create, to create for you automatically a video out of all this content. Let me demonstrate that to you. I have a PDF document here. OK, that's a PDF about the essence of the monument at Notre Dame de Paris. And I do have some images here.

OK, so these are really nice images. So I like to create the movie out of all these and be able to run that on my iPhone. So let's name that Notre Dame de Paris with a one four, put that in this folder. So this is going to be all the documents I'd like to submit.

Then let's create an archive of that. And let's submit that with the web interface. So first let's take the zip file, then enter a nice title, simple description for the sake of the demo, oh I need a workflow. Let's use the Montage workflow for that. And click publish. The file again is going to be submitted into the Podcast Producer and Podcast Producer is going to process it.

So while it's processing, let me go back to the assistant.

[ Period of silence ]

So if you remember, previously I selected the express setup. So the express setup is really for an all-in-one configuration but what if you already have an Open Directory service running. What if you already have an Xgrid controller somewhere else? And like to create a setup of Podcast Producer using the services for you automatically as automatically as we've seen with express setup.

Well in that particular case, you select this one. So it's going to ask you a couple of questions like what's the main administrator for these podcasting environment that you have on your, on your existing Open Directory? Then you may, it will ask you where do you want to put all the different information, all the data about the Podcast Library and the Podcast Producer server? So instead of using the default shelf point, you could decide to put that to somewhere, somewhere else shelf folder.

And then if you have an Xgrid setup somewhere and you'd like to join it, it's time to do it right there and actually join your existing system. And once you're done again press continue. It is going to communicate with all these different services, make sure everything is agrees about all what's going to happen to podcasting.

And then it's done for you automatically. I hope you like how now your, you're going to customize, how you're going to set up Podcast Producer. And I hope we made it very easy for you. So let's see now if the content has been published. If I go back here I do have a link to my podcast library. So if I go here and here, it's not there yet. Since I am an administrator, we're going to look at exhibit admin. Oh, this server is fresh one, Podcast Producer 2.

My credentials are Eric. But this by the way is a tool that administrators are going to use to actually have a full view of all the workflows running on your system. So it's really nice because then you'll be able to see what is the power used for the, all the grid you've just about.

So it's really great.

[ Period of silence ]

From there while it's still processing, I'd like to give you some additional information about the library. So the library is called a specific place in the file system, where all the metafiles and all metadata are going to be stored. And the nice thing of that is the library still has a flag on the file system. I mean we don't put information databases, we don't put information everywhere on other internal infrastructures. Every, everything is flat.

So if you'd like to remove items from the database, just remove it from the file system, you have to rebuild everything and it's done. Later, you'd like to add additional content from last year, you add it and it automatically all the feeds are going to be rebuilt for you. And I think this is pretty interesting.

So it's almost done. Let's see now if some of the content has been published. OK, go in my feed. Let's download it on the file system so I can run it in QuickTime 10. Oops, let's look for QuickTime 10, then.

[ Period of silence ]

And see how it looks like.

[ Period of silence ]

[ Music ]

So let's play it again nice branding, pretty sure you know about that. Nice titling again and with Quick Look we had extracted from all the files that I have just submitted, we have extracted the images. And if these images are actually in portrait mode, then we have, we did cut it in two. So then all that is totally readable and playable in the iPhone very nicely.

This was my PDF document. It's almost done and then we'll see all the images that I have submitted.

[ Period of silence ]

And these are all the images. The cool thing with Quick Look is you can even see all the different chapters of my movie. And so you can actually jump to this different places in my documents.

[ Applause ]

And stop again. Thank you very much. Back to Kjell.

[ Applause ]

 That new chapter UI is really cool. So we just looked at some of the new features in Podcast Producers. And these are some of the many, many features that we've been really working on. So let's recap real quick. We have this brand new application Podcast Composer which makes it really fun to write Podcast Producer workflows with now. We have a new centralized location for hosting all of your content with the Podcast Library. And it's going to make it really easy to integrate with exterior services.

With the Dual Source you can make really, really rich picture in picture podcasts. We've got a great story with iTunes U and we're going to make it really easy for you to get your content to iTunes U. And we really think the Podcast Library is going to become the easiest way and the best way to get your content out to iTunes U. With the web app you can now access Podcast Producer from any web capable platform. High availability in the Pro video applications integration, is also some services that are really great. Now we've made this really easy to set up.

So you can just go home and play with it right, right away. We've got a lot of related sessions, still a few more sessions coming this week. So tomorrow we're going to be going and looking at Podcast Composer in depth. We're really going to show you how to get the most out of the application so that you can write the best workflows possible.

We're also going to show you how you can customize and add more content into Podcast Composer to make it even better. Deploying Podcast Producer on Friday where we're going to spend half the, the first half of the session looking at best practices for setting up Podcast Producer in big environments. But the second half we're going to spend looking at the library and kind of explaining how the library works and how you can customize it for your organization.

And then on 1030 on Friday the0re's an awesome session where we're going to do something that Apple rarely does. We're going to give you a sneak peek behind all of the technologies that were developed and we're going to show you how we leveraged all of the Mac OS X technologies to develop a lot of the features that are in Podcast Producer.

We've got two labs this week. There's one right after this session. So we'll be, the whole team will be down there to answer any questions you have. And we have one, so I think actually the time is changed to noon on Friday since it's after the Deploying Podcast Producer session.

With that, oh if you have any more questions or you'd like some more information, please contact Mark Malone. The email is podcastproducer@apple.com. And at this time I'd like to invite the rest of the Podcast Producer team on stage and Nader is going to moderate for Q and A.

[ Applause ]

So thank you.
